              MASTER THESIS

            Bc. Norbert Micheľ
             Min Cut-Path

                 Department of Applied Mathematics

Supervisor of the master thesis: prof. RNDr. Martin Loebl, CSc.
                Study programme: Discrete Models and Algorithms

                                 Prague 2025
I declare that I carried out this master thesis on my own, and only with the
cited sources, literature and other professional sources. I understand that my
work relates to the rights and obligations under the Act No. 121/2000 Sb., the
Copyright Act, as amended, in particular the fact that the Charles University has
the right to conclude a license agreement on the use of this work as a school work
pursuant to Section 60 subsection 1 of the Copyright Act.

In . . . . . . . . . . . . . date . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .....................................
                                                                          Author’s signature
My sincere gratitude goes to my supervisor for suggesting such an original and
thought-provoking thesis topic, which I believe holds potential for further research.
I also would like to thank everyone who offered valuable advice and guidance to
improve my work.
Title: Min Cut-Path

Author: Bc. Norbert Micheľ

Department: Department of Applied Mathematics

Supervisor: prof. RNDr. Martin Loebl, CSc., Department of Applied Mathematics

Abstract: This thesis addresses the Min Cut-Path problem: finding a minimal set
of edges that simultaneously contains both a u-v cut and a u-v path in a graph.
The combination of these two concepts increases the complexity of the problem
beyond that of standard algorithms for cuts or paths. We identify and analyze
the conditions under which the Min Cut-Path problem allows efficient solutions.
For graphs with diam or cut 2, that is, for all x, y with d(x,y) <= 2 or c(x,y)
<= 2, we propose a polynomial-time algorithm for the case c(u, v) = 2, based
on a decomposition using general square graphs. In Erdős–Rényi random graphs,
we present an approximation scheme with an average-case guarantee arbitrarily
close to 1. Furthermore, we propose an almost polynomial-time algorithm for
sparse instances. Finally, we study the symmetric case c(u,v) = d(u,v) = cp(u,v)
and provide polynomial-time algorithms for recognizing this property and finding
solutions in nearly 5-regular graphs.

Keywords: Graph, edge-cut, path, cut-path, general path, square graph, general
square graph, diam or cut 2 graph, nearly k-regular graphs, symmetric cut-path

Název práce: Minimalni rez-cesta

Autor: Bc. Norbert Micheľ

Katedra: Katedra aplikované matematiky

Vedoucí diplomové práce: prof. RNDr. Martin Loebl, CSc., Katedra aplikované
matematiky

Abstrakt: Tato diplomová práce se zabývá problémem minimalni rez-cesta:
hledáním minimální množiny hran, která současně obsahuje u-v řez i u-v cestu v
grafu. Spojení těchto dvou konceptů zvyšuje složitost problému nad rámec stan-
dardních algoritmů pro řez nebo cestu. Identifikujeme a analyzujeme podmínky,
za kterých má problém minimalni rez-cesta efektivní řešení. Pro grafy s průměrem
nebo řezem nanejvýš dva, tedy když pro všichni x,y d(x,y) <= 2 nebo c(x,y) <=
2, navrhujeme polynomiální algoritmus pro případ c(u,v) = 2, založený na dekom-
pozici pomocí obecných čtvercových grafů. V Erdős–Rényi náhodných grafech
prezentujeme aproximační schéma s průměrnou zárukou přesnosti libovolně blízké
1. Dále navrhujeme téměř polynomiální algoritmus pro řídké instance. Nakonec
se zabýváme symetrickým případem c(u,v) = d(u,v) = cp(u,v) a poskytujeme
polynomiální algoritmy pro rozpoznání této vlastnosti a pro hledání řešení v téměř
5-regulárních grafech.

Klíčová slova: Graf, hranovy rez, cesta, řezo-cesta, obecná cesta, čtvercový graf,
obecný čtvercový graf, graf s průměrem nebo řezem nejvýše dva, téměř k-regulární
graf, symetrická řezo-cesta
Contents

Introduction                                                       7

1 Foundations                                                      9

1.1 Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

1.1.1 Degree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

1.1.2 Path and Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

1.1.3 Cut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

1.1.4 Tree and Spanning Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

1.1.5 Graph Transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

1.1.6 Useful Theorems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

1.2 Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

1.2.1 Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

1.2.2 Approximation and Polynomial-Time Algorithm . . . . . . 15

1.3 Probability Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

2 Fundamentals of Cut-Path Problem                                 18

2.1 Cut-Path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

2.2 Tree-Cut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

2.3 Basic Properties of Cut-Path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

2.4 Exploiting Partial Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

3 Min Cut-Path Problem in Special Graph Classes                    25

3.1 Graphs of Diameter Two . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

3.2 Graphs with Cut-Value at Most Two . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

3.3 Diam or Cut 2 Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

3.3.1 General Square Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

3.3.2 Tranformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

3.3.3 Polynomial-Time Construction of General Square Graph . 42

3.3.4 Polynomial-Time Algorithm for Min Cut-Path in Diam or

              Cut 2 Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45

3.3.5 Linear-Time Algorithm for Min Cut-Path with General

              Square Graph Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48

4 Min Cut-Path Problem in Random Graphs                            52

4.1 Time Complexity Classes for Random Graph Algorithms . . . . . 52

4.2 Diameter of Erdős-Rényi G(n, 1/c) Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54

4.3 Properties of Erdős-Rényi Random Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55

4.4 Average-Case Approximation for Min Cut-Path in Erdős-Rényi

Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56

4.5 Almost Polynomial Average-Case Approximation Algorithm in

Erdős-Rényi Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

5 Min Cut-Path Problem: The c(u, v) = d(u, v) = cp(u, v) Case      60

5.1 Fundamentals of c(u, v) = d(u, v) = cp(u, v) Case . . . . . . . . . 60

5.2 Algorithmic Solutions for Min Cut-Path in c(u, v) = d(u, v) =

cp(u, v) Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64

               5
5.2.1 Filter-BFS Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5.2.2 Local-Cut Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.2.3 Polynomial Cases: Nearly k-Regular Graphs . . . . . . . . 67
5.2.4 Limitations of Filter-BFS and Local-Cut Algorithms . . . 69

Conclusion                71

Bibliography              73

List of Figures           74

List of Tables            75

List of Abbreviations     76

A Attachments             77

                       6
Introduction

    Many fundamental graph problems are related to connectivity or separation
between nodes, which is formally captured by the concepts of paths and cuts.
This thesis investigates a novel optimization problem that integrates both: the
Min Cut-Path problem.

    The Min Cut-Path problem emerges from the combination of these two foun-
dational concepts. The integration of cuts and paths is of particular interest due
to the contrasting behavior of these concepts. For example, in denser graphs,
minimum cut values typically increase, while shortest path distances tend to
decrease. Combining these requirements into a single objective function results in
a complex interplay, which poses a significant optimization challenge.

    The Min Cut-Path problem is considerably more intricate than its individual
components. A key difficulty arises from the fact that the union of an edge set
that produces a minimum cut c(u, v) and an edge set that realizes a shortest path
d(u, v) does not, in general, yields an optimal solution. Specifically, the minimum
cut-path cp(u, v) cannot be determined solely from c(u, v) and d(u, v), as the
optimal solution does not necessarily correspond to their union. This observation
underscores the need for new algorithmic techniques beyond standard approaches
for shortest paths and minimum cuts. Despite the general case appearing to
be computationally intractable, a formal proof of NP-hardness remains an open
problem.

    This thesis focuses on the structural properties and algorithmic aspects of
the Min Cut-Path problem. The goal is to identify conditions and graph classes
where the problem is tractable, or at least approximable, and to develop efficient
algorithms for these cases. The primary challenges addressed include:

   • Developing polynomial-time algorithms for Min Cut-Path on specific, struc-
       turally constrained graph classes.

   • Analyze the behavior and complexity of Min Cut-Path in random graphs
       and investigate its average-case characteristics.

   • Charactezation of the special symmetric case where c(u, v) = d(u, v) =
       cp(u, v).

    This work contributes to understanding the Min Cut-Path problem by providing
several novel results. In Chapter 2, we establish fundamental properties and
bounds. In Chapter 3, we investigate specific graph classes, culminating in a
polynomial-time (and potentially linear-time) algorithm for the important class of
diam or cut 2 graphs, using a novel decomposition technique based on general
square graphs. Chapter 4 explores the behavior of the problem in random graphs,
presenting an average-case approximation scheme for dense Erdős-Rényi random
graphs and an almost polynomial-time average-case algorithm for sparse instances.
Finally, Chapter 5 addresses the symmetric case c(u, v) = d(u, v) = cp(u, v),
providing polynomial-time algorithms to decide this property and solve instances
for nearly 5-regular graphs.

                                                   7
Structure of the Thesis

    The thesis is structured as follows:
   • Chapter 1: Foundations. Introduces the fundamental concepts from

       graph theory, algorithms, and probability theory necessary for understanding
       the following chapters.
   • Chapter 2: Fundamentals of the Cut-Path Problem. Formally
       defines the Min Cut-Path problem, establishes basic properties, bounds,
       and relationships with standard cuts and paths, and introduces the related
       Tree-Cut concept.
   • Chapter 3: Min Cut-Path Problem in Special Graph Classes.
       Focuses on developing efficient algorithms for Min Cut-Path in graphs with
       specific structural properties, including graphs with diameter two, graphs
       with cut-value at most two, and the combined diam or cut 3 class. Introduces
       the general square graph decomposition technique.
   • Chapter 4: Min Cut-Path Problem in Random Graphs. Analyzes
       the Min Cut-Path problem within the context of Erdős-Rényi random graphs,
       examining average case complexity, approximation schemes, and developing
       an almost polynomial average case algorithm for sparse instances.
   • Chapter 5: Min Cut-Path Problem: The c(u, v) = d(u, v) = cp(u, v)
       Case. Investigates the structural implications and algorithmic solutions for
       the special symmetric case, including algorithms for nearly 5-regular graphs.
   • Conclusion. Summarizes the main findings of the thesis and suggests
       directions for future research.

                                                   8
1 Foundations

    This chapter introduces definitions and fundamental concepts essential for
understanding the subsequent discussion in this thesis. We establish notation and
present key theorems from graph theory, algorithms, and probability that will be
necessary in the analysis in the min cut-path problem and other related topics
explored in later chapters.

1.1 Graph

    Graphs serve as a fundamental mathematical structure for modeling a wide
range of optimization problems in computer science. By representing complex
systems as graphs, one can systematically analyze network flows, connectivity
properties, and structural constraints. The fundamental concepts of graph theory,
such as connectivity and cuts, provide the theoretical basis for designing efficient
algorithms for the Minimum Cut-Path problem. A comprehensive treatment
of these graph-theoretic principles can be found in [1].

Definition 1 (Graph). A graph G is an ordered pair (V, E), where:

   • V is a set of vertices (nodes), representing the fundamental elements of the
       graph.

   • E is a set of edges, where each edge is a pair of vertices {u, v} for u, v ∈ V .

A graph can be directed (edges are ordered pairs) or undirected (edges are unordered
pairs).

Definition 2 (Component). A component of a graph G is a maximal connected
subgraph of G; that is, a subgraph in which any two vertices are connected by a
path and that is not contained in any larger connected subgraph.

Definition 3 (k-edge-connectivity). A graph G is k-edge-connected if it remains
connected after removal of any set of at most k − 1 edges. Formally: for every set
F ⊆ E with |F | < k, the graph G \ F is connected.

1.1.1 Degree

    The degree of a vertex, defined as the number of incident edges, describes
its local connectivity and structural significance in the graph. In path and cut
problems, the degree plays a crucial role in determining feasible separations and
connectivity constraints, directly impacting the efficiency of the algorithms for the
Minimum Cut-Path problem.

Definition 4 (Degree Vertex). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let v ∈ V be a
vertex. The degree of v, denoted deg(v), is the number of edges in G that contain
the vertex v. For an undirected graph:

                                    deg(v) = |{{u, v} ∈ E}|.

                                                   9
Definition 5 (Vertex Degree With Respect to Set). Let G = (V, E) be a graph,
S ⊆ V be a set of vertices, and v ∈ V be a vertex. The degree of v with respect
to S, denoted deg(v, S), is the number of vertices u ∈ S such that (u, v) ∈ E.
Formal ly:

                              deg(v, S) = |{u ∈ S | {u, v} ∈ E}|.

Definition 6 (Isolated Vertex). Let G = (V, E) be a graph. A vertex v ∈ V is
called isolated if its degree is deg(v) = 0.

1.1.2 Path and Cycle

    In this work, we define fundamental concepts such as path and cycle, which are
essential for analyzing graph structures. A path is a sequence of distinct vertices
connected by edges, while a cycle is a closed path where the first and last vertex
coincide.

Definition 7 (Path). Let G = (V, E) be a graph. A path in G is a sequence of
vertices P = (v0, v1, . . . , vk), where vi ∈ V for all i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , k} and for each
i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k}, {vi−1, vi} ∈ E. The length of the path P is the number of edges
in the path, which is k.

Definition 8 (Paths). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V be two distinct
vertices. The set of all paths between u and v, denoted by path(u, v), is defined as:

                     path(u, v) = {P | P is a path between u and v}.

Definition 9 (Cycle). A cycle in a graph G = (V, E) is a sequence of vertices
C = (v0, v1, . . . , vk) such that:

    • vi ∈ V for all i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , k},
    • {vi−1, vi} ∈ E for all i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k},
    • v0 = vk,
    • All edges {vi−1, vi} are distinct, and all vertices v0, v1, . . . , vk−1 are distinct.

The length of the cycle is k, the number of edges in C.

Definition 10 (Distance). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V be two
distinct vertices. The distance between u and v, denoted by d(u, v), is defined as
the minimum number of edges in any path between u and v. Formally:

                             d(u, v) = min{|P | | P ∈ path(u, v)}.

    In this thesis, we will refer to a min path (or shortest path) between the vertices
u and v as any path P ∈ path(u, v) whose length is equal to the distance d(u, v),
i.e., |P | = d(u, v).

                                                   10
1.1.3 Cut

    Cuts are fundamental in analyzing connectivity and are crucial in problems
such as the min cut, where the goal is to determine optimal separation while
preserving certain structural properties.

Definition 11 (Cut). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let S ⊆ V be a subset of
vertices. The cut determined by S is the set of edges δ(S) ⊆ E, where each edge
e ∈ δ(S) connects a vertex in S to a vertex in V \ S. Formally:

                          δ(S) = {{u, v} ∈ E | u ∈ S, v ∈ V \ S}.

Definition 12 (Cuts). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V be two distinct
vertices. A cut between u and v is a set of edges C ⊆ E such that the removal of
C disconnects u and v. The set of all cuts between u and v, denoted by cut(u, v),
is defined as:

                      cut(u, v) = {C ⊆ E | cut seperating u from v}.

Definition 13 (Value of Minimum Cut). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let
u, v ∈ V be two distinct vertices. The value c(u, v) is defined as the minimum size
of a cut between u and v. Formally:

                              c(u, v) = min{|C| | C ∈ cut(u, v)}.

    In this thesis, we will refer to a min cut between the vertices u and v as
any cut C ∈ cut(u, v) whose size is equal to the minimum cut value c(u, v), i.e.,
|C| = c(u, v).

1.1.4 Tree and Spanning Tree

    One of the more structured forms of graphs are trees and spanning trees, which
play a crucial role in connectivity analysis. A tree is an acyclic connected graph,
while a spanning tree of a graph is a subgraph that includes all vertices and forms
a tree.

Definition 14 (Tree). A graph G = (V, E) is a tree if it satisfies the following
conditions:

   • G is connected.

   • G contains no cycles.

Definition 15 (Spanning Tree). Let G = (V, E) be a connected graph. A span-
ning tree of G is a subgraph T = (V, ET ) such that:

   • T is a tree (i.e., it is connected and acyclic),

   • V (T ) = V (G).

                                                  11
For better understanding, we provide an illustrative example:

    Figure 1.1 Spanning Tree

Definition 16 (Value of Minimum Tree). Let G = (V, E) be a graph. The
minimum size of any spanning tree of G, denoted by t(G), is defined as:

                                          t(G) = |V | − 1.

1.1.5 Graph Transformations

    In this subsection, we define several transformations, namely subgraph and
contraction, which help extract essential structural information from the original
graph. A subgraph is a graph formed by a subset of vertices and edges of the
original graph, while contraction reduces a graph by merging adjacent vertices,
preserving key connectivity properties.

Definition 17 (Contraction of edge). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let e =
{u, v} ∈ E be an edge that connects vertices u and v. The contraction of edge
e produces a new graph G′ = (V ′, E′), where:

    V ′ = V \ {u, v} ∪ {w},

{︃                                          }︃ {︃              }︃

E′ = {w, x} | {s, x} ∈ E \ {e} ∧ s ∈ {u, v} ∪ {x, y} ∈ E | x, y ∈/ {u, v} ,

where w is a new vertex replacing u and v.

For better understanding, we provide an illustrative example:

    Figure 1.2 Contraction of edge e

                         12
Definition 18 (Subgraph). Let G = (V, E) be a graph. A graph H = (V ′, E′) is
a subgraph of G if:

   • V′ ⊆V,

   • E′ ⊆ E.

1.1.6 Useful Theorems

    In this work, we will frequently make use of Menger’s Theorem, both in its
edge and vertex versions. These fundamental results establish a deep connection
between the concepts of cuts and paths by stating that the size of a minimum
cut equals the maximum number of pairwise independent paths. This duality will
serve as a key tool in the analysis of the Min Cut-Path problem.

Theorem 1 (Menger’s Theorem (Vertex Version)). Let G = (V, E) be a graph,
and let u and v be two non-adjacent vertices in G. Then the minimum number of
vertices that must be removed from G to separate u and v into different connected
components is equal to the maximum number of internal vertex-disjoint paths
between u and v.

Theorem 2 (Menger’s Theorem (Edge Version)). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and
let u and v be two distinct vertices in G. Then the minimum number of edges that
must be removed from G to separate u and v into different connected components
is equal to the maximum number of edge-disjoint paths between u and v.

1.2 Algorithm

    This chapter provides a brief overview of essential algorithmic terminology
and classifications. These foundational concepts are necessary for the algorithmic
treatment of the Min Cut-Path problem in the following chapters.

1.2.1 Algorithm

    An algorithm is a finite and well-defined sequence of computational steps
that transforms input into output to solve a specific problem. Each step in an
algorithm is composed of basic operations, which are elementary actions assumed
to take constant time, such as comparisons, assignments, or arithmetic calculations.
The efficiency of an algorithm is often measured by the number of operations it
performs as a function of the input size. A detailed exposition of these fundamental
notions can be found in [2], which also provides comprehensive introductions to
essential algorithms such as Breadth-First Search (BFS), Dijkstra’s algorithm for
shortest paths and Ford-Fulkerson’s algorithm for computing maximum flow in
networks.

Definition 19 (Operation). An operation is a fundamental computational
step that transforms a given state into a new state according to predefined rules.
Formally, an operation is a mapping:

                                             O : S → S,

                                                  13
    where S is the set of all possible computational states, and for each state s ∈ S,
the application of O results in a new state O(s).

    An operation satisfies the following properties:

   • Each operation O is well-defined, meaning that for every input state s, there
       exists a unique output state O(s).

   • A sequence of operations (O1, O2, . . . , Ok) can be applied iteratively, pro-
       ducing a sequence of states (s1, s2, . . . , sk+1), where si+1 = Oi(si) for each
       i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k}.

   • The execution of each operation is completed in a bounded number of com-
       putational steps.

Definition 20 (Algorithm). Let I be the set of inputs and O the set of outputs.
An algorithm is formally defined as a computational procedure:

                                             A : I → O,
    where for every input x ∈ I:

   • There exists a finite sequence of operations A(x) = (O1, O2, . . . , Ok), where
       si is the computational state at step i,

   • For each i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k − 1}, the state si+1 is uniquely determined by the
       rules of A from si,

   • The final state sk provides the output A(x) ∈ O.

    An optimal algorithm is one that always produces the best possible solution
to a given problem according to a specified objective function. In the context of
optimization problems, such an algorithm guarantees correctness and achieves
the minimum (or maximum) value among all feasible solutions. Moreover, when
analyzing optimal algorithms, we are often interested not only in the quality of
the solution but also in their computational efficiency.

Definition 21 (Optimal Algorithm). Let P be an optimization problem with an
objective function f : S → R, where S is the set of feasible solutions. An algorithm
A is optimal for P if for every input x ∈ I:

                           A(x) ∈ arg min f (s) (minimization),
                                                              s∈S(x)

                          A(x) ∈ arg max f (s) (maximization),
                                                              s∈S(x)

    where S(x) ⊆ S is the set of feasible solutions for input x.

    For the sake of brevity, we will denote an optimal algorithm as OPT in the
subsequent discussions.

                                                  14
1.2.2 Approximation and Polynomial-Time Algorithm

    A polynomial-time algorithm is an algorithm whose execution time is bounded
by a polynomial function of the input size, typically denoted by O(nk) for some
constant k. This means that as the input size grows, the time required to compute
the result grows at a rate that is manageable and considered efficient in theoretical
computer science. Formally:

Definition 22 (O(f(n))). Let f : N → R+ be a function. A function g(n) is said
to be O(f(n)) (big O of f (n)) if there exist positive constants c and n0 such that

                             0 ≤ g(n) ≤ c · f (n) for all n ≥ n0.

Definition 23 (Polynomial-Time Algorithm). An algorithm A is polynomial-
time if there exists a polynomial P (n) such that for every input x of length n = |x|,
the number of operations TA(x) performed by A satisfies:

                                          TA(x) ≤ P (n).

Equivalently, the time complexity of A is O(P (n)).

    When no polynomial-time algorithm is known to solve a problem optimally,
one often resorts to approximation algorithms. These algorithms do not necessarily
produce the best possible solution, but guarantee that the solution is within a
certain factor of the optimal one. Approximation algorithms are especially useful
for tackling computationally hard problems where exact solutions are too costly
to compute in practice.

Definition 24 (Approximation Algorithm). Let P be an optimization problem
with optimal value OPT(x). An algorithm A is an approximation algorithm
with approximation factor α ≥ 1 if:

   • A is a polynomial-time algorithm,

   • For all x ∈ I:

  A(x)
OPT(x) ≤ α (for minimization),

OPT(x)  ≤  α  (for maximization).
  A(x)

1.3 Probability Theory

    In this thesis, we are interested not only in the worst-case behavior of algorithms
for the Min Cut-Path problem, but also in their performance on random inputs. To
this end, we will use tools from probability theory to analyze the complexity of the
average case. In our setting, we will work with finite graphs and discrete structures,
so we do not need the full machinery of measure theory. Instead, we introduce
the notion of a finite discrete probability space, which is a simple and intuitive
model sufficient for our purposes. It allows us to reason about random choices,

              15
expected values, and average case performance in a mathematically rigorous way,
while remaining within a finite and combinatorial framework [3].

    To formally describe randomness, we begin by introducing the notion of a
probability measure, which assigns numerical values to events and underpins the
entire probabilistic model. Once this measure is established, we define a finite
discrete probability space that captures both the sample space and the structure
of events.

Definition 25 (Probability Measure). Let Ω = {ω1, ω2, . . . , ωn} be a finite sample
space, and let 2Ω be the set of all possible events (subsets of Ω). A probability
measure P on (Ω, 2Ω) is a function P : 2Ω → [0, 1] determined as follows:

   • P({ω}) ≥ 0 to each elementary event {ω} (where ω ∈ Ω).

   • P(Ω) = 1.

   • The probability of any event A ∈ 2Ω is then defined as:

                                           P(A) = ∑︂ P({ω}).

                                                                                ω∈A

    This leads us to the formal definition of the finite discrete probability space.

Definition 26 (Finite Discrete Probability Space). A finite discrete probabil-
ity space is a triple (Ω, 2Ω, P), where:

   • Ω = {ω1, ω2, . . . , ωn} is a non-empty, finite set, representing all possible
       outcomes (the sample space).

   • 2Ω is the power set of Ω, serving as the set of all possible events. Any
       subset of Ω is considered an event.

   • P : 2Ω → [0, 1] is a probability measure that assigns a probability to each
       event in 2Ω.

    To reason quantitatively about random processes on graphs, one also needs
the notion of a random variable, which maps the result in the sample space to
real values.

Definition 27 (Random Variable). Let (Ω, 2Ω, P) be a finite discrete probability
space. A random variable is a function X : Ω → R.

    The expected value and the variance are two fundamental characteristics that
help us to understand the behavior of random variables. The expected value
provides a measure of the tendency or the average-case outcome of a random
process, while the variance quantifies the spread or variability of those outcomes.
These concepts are essential in analyzing the performance of algorithms, especially
when dealing with random input or probabilistic models, as they provide insight
into the typical behavior and the degree of fluctuation around the expected
outcome.

                                                  16
Definition 28 (Expected Value). Let (Ω, 2Ω, P) be a finite discrete probability
space and let X : Ω → R be a random variable. The expected value of X is
defined as:

                                    E[X] = ∑︂ X(ω)P({ω}).

                                                                     ω∈Ω

    If X attains distinct values x1, x2, . . . , xk, an equivalent calculation is:

                                                                      k

                                   E[X] = ∑︂ xj · P(X = xj).

                                                                    j=1

Definition 29 (Variance). Let X be a random variable with a finite expected
value µ = E[X]. The variance of the random variable X, denoted by Var(X), is
defined as:

                      Var(X )  =  E   [︂   −  µ)2]︂  .

                                       (X

    Using these definitions, we can apply a well-known inequality that will be
helpful to our analysis. Markov’s inequality provides a simple tool to bound the
probability that a random variable exceeds a certain value.

Theorem 3 (Markov’s Inequality). Let X ≥ 0 be a non-negative random variable,

and let a > 0. Then:                     E[X] .
                                           a
                      P(X      ≥  a)  ≤

                                  17
2 Fundamentals of Cut-Path
Problem

    Having established the foundational tools from graph theory, algorithmics, and
probability in the preceding chapter, we now direct our focus to the core subject
of this thesis: the Min Cut-Path Problem. This chapter serves as a crucial
stepping stone, formally defining the Min Cut-Path problem and exploring its
fundamental properties. Understanding this problem is not merely a theoretical
exercise; it has significant implications in various network applications where
exclusive connectivity is paramount.

    In this chapter, we will rigorously define the concept of a cut-path, which
encapsulates this combined notion of a cut and a path. We will explore its formal
properties, its relationship to traditional cuts and paths, and introduce a related
concept, the tree-cut. This foundational understanding will pave the way for
analyzing algorithmic approaches and exploring specific instances of the Min
Cut-Path problem in subsequent chapters.

2.1 Cut-Path

    The notion of a cut-path captures a hybrid structure in a graph that combines
two fundamental and seemingly opposing elements: a path and a cut. Intuitively,
a cut-path between two vertices u and v is a set of edges that simultaneously
contains a path connecting u to v, and a cut that, if removed, would disconnect u
from v. In this sense, a cut-path ensures both communication and control.

Definition 30 (Cut-Path). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V be two
distinct vertices. A cut-path between u and v is a set of edges S ⊆ E such that:

   • There exist subsets A, B ⊆ S where:

          – A is a cut separating u and v (i.e., removing A disconnects u and v),
          – B is a path connecting u and v (i.e., B forms a sequence of edges

             between u and v).

Definition 31 (Cut-Paths). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V be two
distinct vertices. The set of all cut-paths between u and v, denoted by cut-path(u, v),
is defined as:

                cut-path(u, v) = {S | S is a cut-path between u and v}.

Definition 32 (Value of Minimum Cut-Path). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and
let u, v ∈ V be two distinct vertices. The minimum size of any cut-path between u
and v, denoted by cp(u, v), is defined as:

                          cp(u, v) = min{|S| | S ∈ cut-path(u, v)}.

    In this thesis, we will refer to a min cut-path between vertices u and v as any
cut-path S ∈ cut-path(u, v) whose size is equal to the minimum cut-path value
cp(u, v), i.e., |S| = cp(u, v).

                                                  18
2.2 Tree-Cut

    Having formally defined the concept of a cut-path, which combines a cut with a
path structure, we now introduce a related concept: the tree-cut. The motivation
for exploring tree-cuts stems from considering alternative, potentially more robust,
ways to combine cuts with spanning subgraphs.

    While a path ensures connectivity between two vertices, a tree, being acyclic
and connected, represents a fundamentally different approach to connecting
vertices. Trees are minimal connected structures, efficient in terms of edge usage,
and possesses unique properties, especially in the context of planar graphs and
graph duality. Unlike paths, trees inherently lack cycles and redundancy in
connections.

    In the definition of a tree-cut, we replace the path component of a cut-path
with a tree component. This substitution leads to a new type of cut structure with
potentially different characteristics and applications, which we will now formally
define.

Definition 33 (Tree-Cut). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V be two
distinct vertices. A tree-cut between u and v is a set of edges S ⊆ E such that:

   • There exist subsets A, B ⊆ S where:

          – A is a cut separating u and v (i.e., removing A disconnects u and v),

          – B is a tree (i.e., B is a subgraph induced by a subset of edges in S,
             which forms a tree).

Definition 34 (Tree-Cuts). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V be two
distinct vertices. The set of all tree-cuts between u and v, denoted by tree-cut(u, v),
is defined as:

                 tree-cut(u, v) = {S | S is a tree-cut between u and v}.

Definition 35 (Value of Minimum Tree-Cut). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and
let u, v ∈ V be two distinct vertices. The minimum size of any tree-cut between u
and v, denoted by tc(u, v), is defined as:

                           tc(u, v) = min{|S| | S ∈ tree-cut(u, v)}.

    It is important to observe that tc(u, v) ≥ cp(u, v), since any tree-cut can
be transformed into a cut-path by extracting a u-v path from the tree. This
transformation yields a cut-path whose size is at most that of the original tree-cut,
implying that the minimum tree-cut value cannot be smaller than the minimum
cut-path value. However, it is possible that the actual tree-cut is slightly larger,
which does not affect this inequality.

    The following two statements demonstrate that the solution to the min tree-cut
problem shares similar, yet distinct, properties with the min cut-path problem.
One key distinction is that, in the case of unweighted graphs, the value tc(u, v)
can be computed quite easily using the next theorem.

Theorem 4. Let G = (V, E) be a connected graph and let u, v ∈ V be two distinct
vertices. Then:

                                          tc(u, v) = t(G).

                                                  19
Proof. Any tree-cut, by definition containing a tree, is bounded as follows:
                                          t(G) ≤ tc(u, v).

    Consider a cut where we take all the edges incident to u. This forms a valid
cut, since removing these edges disconnects u from the rest of the graph. For
better understanding, we provide an illustrative example:

           Figure 2.1 Edges Incident to Vertex u Forming a Tree-Cut

    These edges do not form a cycle, and by applying Kruskal’s algorithm for
constructing a minimum spanning tree, we can see that we can always construct
a spanning tree.

    After constructing this spanning tree, we obtain a valid tree-cut, which implies:
                                          t(G) ≥ tc(u, v).

    By combining these two inequalities, we conclude that:
                                          t(G) = tc(u, v).

Theorem 5. For every n > 2, there exists a weighted graph G = (V, E) with
distinct vertices u, v ∈ V and |V | = n such that:

                                          t(G) ̸= tc(u, v).
Proof. Consider the complete graph Kn with the vertex set V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn},
where we set u = v1 and v = vn. The edge weights are assigned as follows:

   • The edges forming the path Pn = (v1, v2, . . . , vn), which traverses all vertices,
       have weight 1.

   • All other edges have weight 2.
    For better understanding, we provide an illustrative example:

         Figure 2.2 Example of Weighted Graph Showing t(G) ̸= tc(u, v)

                                                  20
    Using Kruskal’s algorithm, the unique minimum spanning tree consists of the
path Pn, as adding any other edge would increase the total weight.

    However, this spanning tree does not contain a cut separating u and v, which
implies that any valid tree-cut must include additional edges. Therefore, we obtain
the following strict inequality:

                                          tc(u, v) > t(G).

This proves the theorem.

2.3 Basic Properties of Cut-Path

    Having introduced both cut-path and tree-cut, we now shift our focus back to
the original cut-path problem and delve deeper into its fundamental properties.
Understanding the inherent characteristics and limitations of cut-paths is crucial
for designing efficient algorithms and analyzing their performance. In this section,
we will explore some basic, yet essential, properties of cut-paths, starting with
establishing bounds on the size of a minimum cut-path.

Claim 6 (Basic Case). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V be two distinct
vertices. If c(u, v) = 1 or d(u, v) = 1, then:

                                cp(u, v) = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1

Proof. Let A be a min cut, so |A| = c(u, v). Let B be a min path, so |B| = d(u, v).
Any path between u and v must intersect any cut that separates them, hence
A ∩ B ≠ ∅.

    From this it follows that:

                 cp(u, v) = max{c(u, v), d(u, v)} = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1

Claim 7 (Basic Bounds). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V be two
distinct vertices. Then, the value of the min cut-path between u and v satisfies:

                 max(c(u, v), d(u, v)) ≤ cp(u, v) ≤ c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1,

Proof. Proving the upper and lower bounds separately.
    1. Upper bound: Let A be a minimum cut separating u and v, and let B

be a shortest path between u and v. Since A separates u and v and B connects
them, taking their union A ∪ B forms a cut-path. In the worst case, A and B
share exactly one edge, resulting in a total size of |A| + |B| − 1. This gives the
upper bound:

                                cp(u, v) ≤ c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1.
    2. Lower bound: Any cut-path must contain at least one set forming a u-v
cut (of size at least c(u, v)) and at least one set forming a u-v path (of length at
least d(u, v)). Since a cut-path must contain both structures, its size must be at
least the maximum of these two values:

                                cp(u, v) ≥ max(c(u, v), d(u, v)).

    This completes the proof.

                                                  21
Claim 8 (Basic Approximation). The union of the edges from a solution to the
Min Cut Problem and a solution to the Min Path Problem gives a 2-approximation
algorithm for the Min Cut-path Problem.

Proof. Let S be the set of edges obtained by taking the union of a min cut A
(with size c(u, v)) and a min path B (with length d(u, v)). Then, the size of S
satisfies:

                                   |S| ≤ c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1.

    Since the optimal cut-path solution satisfies:

         cp(u, v) ≥ max(c(u, v), d(u, v)),

we get:

         |S| ≤ c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1 ≤ OP T + OP T − 1 < 2OP T.

Dividing by OP T gives:

                                        |S| < 2OP T = 2.
                                       OP T OP T

    Thus, the algorithm provides a 2-approximation for the minimum cut-path
problem.

    One of the key observations regarding the Min Cut-Path problem is that the
behavior of cuts and paths significantly differs. The following claim demonstrates
a relationship between the min cut and the Min Cut-Path problem; however,
no such direct relationship exists between the min path and the Min Cut-Path
problem.

Theorem 9 (Global Min Cut-Path). Let G = (V, E) be a graph. Then the
following holds:

         min cp(u, v) = min c(u, v).
         (u,v)∈E                  (u,v)∈E

Proof. From Claim 7, we can deduce that the following holds:

                       min c(u, v) ≤ c(x, y) ≤ cp(x, y), ∀x, y ∈ V.

                                 (u,v)∈E

    If we take the minimum cut in the graph and select any edge (x, y) that belongs
to this cut, from the upper bound, we know from Claim 7 that:

           min cp(u, v) ≤ cp(x, y) ≤ c(x, y) + d(x, y)) − 1 = c(x, y).

               (u,v)∈E

By combining these two inequalities, we obtain:

         min c(u, v) = min cp(u, v),
         (u,v)∈E              (u,v)∈E

which is the desired result.

                              22
2.4 Exploiting Partial Solutions

    Exploring the properties of cut-path provides valuable theoretical insights
into the nature of the problem. However, from an algorithmic perspective, a
crucial question is whether we can leverage specific knowledge about the solution
structure to design more efficient algorithms. In this section, we address this
question by considering scenarios where we possess partial information about the
minimum cut-path. Specifically, we investigate whether knowing either a path or
a cut that is part of a minimum cut-path allows us to find the complete minimum
cut-path in polynomial time. This exploration will shed light on potential avenues
for algorithm design and problem simplification under certain conditions.

Theorem 10 (Partial Path Property). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V
be two distinct vertices. Let P be a path between u and v. If P is a path in a
minimum cut-path between u and v, then the minimum cut-path can be found in
polynomial time.

Proof. Let H = (V, E \ P ), i.e., remove all edges in the path P from G. Compute
a minimum cut C in H separating u and v. This can be done using a polynomial-
time algorithm for the minimum cut problem, such as Karger’s algorithm or
the Ford-Fulkerson method. The solution to the minimum cut-path problem is
S = P ∪ C.

   1. Feasibility:
       The set S = P ∪ C is a valid cut-path. By construction:

          • P ensures that a path between u and v is preserved.
          • C disconnects u and v in H, which means removing C from G (along

              with P ) disconnects u and v.

   2. Minimality:
       If there existed a cut C′ in G such that |C′ ∪ P | < |C ∪ P |, we could form a
       new cut C′′ = C′ \ P , which would satisfy |C′′| < |C|. Since C′′ is a valid
       cut in H, this contradicts the assumption that C is the minimum cut in H.

   3. Polynomial-Time Complexity:

          • Removing edges in P to construct H takes O(|E|) time.
          • Finding a min cut in H using Karger’s algorithm runs in O(n3) time,

              which is a polynomial.
          • Combining P and C takes O(|P | + |C|) time, which is linear in the size

              of the graph.

       Since all steps are polynomial in the input size, the algorithm runs in
       polynomial time.

                                                  23
Theorem 11 (Partial Cut Property). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V
be two distinct vertices. Let C be a cut between u and v. If C is a cut in a
minimum cut-path between u and v, then the minimum cut-path can be found in
polynomial time.
Proof. Define the auxiliary graph H by contracting all edges of the cut C. This
contraction merges the vertex partition containing u into a single supernode s1 in
H, and the partition containing v into a second supernode s2. If the contraction
of edges in C results in supernodes s1 and s2 belonging to different connected
components in the auxiliary graph H, then pathfinding algorithms (such as BFS
or Dijkstra’s) executed on H will correctly determine that there is no path P
between s1 and s2 in G. Since the construction of the solution requires finding such
a path P in H to form the candidate cut-path S = C ∪ P , the disconnectedness
of s1 and s2 directly implies that there does not exist a cut-path between u and v.

    Compute a shortest path P in H connecting s1 and s2. This can be done
using BFS or Dijkstra’s algorithm (if weights exist). The solution to the minimum
cut-path problem is S = C ∪ P .

   1. Feasibility:
          • C is a cut in G.
          • P ensures a preserved path between s1 and s2 in H, which corresponds
              to a path between u and v in G that bypasses C.
          • Thus, S = C ∪ P is a valid cut-path.

   2. Minimality:
       If there existed a cut P ′ in G such that |P ′ ∪ C| < |P ∪ C|, we could form a
       new path P ′′ = P ′ \ C, which would satisfy |P ′′| < |P |. Since P ′′ is a valid
       path in H, this contradicts the assumption that P is the minimum path in
       H.

   3. Polynomial-Time Complexity:
          • Contracting edges in C takes O(|E|k) time.
          • Finding the shortest path P in H takes O(|V | + |E|) using BFS.
          • Combining C and P takes O(|C| + |P |), which is linear.

       All steps are polynomial in input size.

                                                  24
3 Min Cut-Path Problem in

Special Graph Classes

    As established in the preceding chapters, particularly in our exploration of the
fundamental properties of the Min Cut-Path problem in Chapter 2, it becomes
evident that finding a universally efficient algorithm for general graphs presents a
formidable challenge. While classical network flow theory provides polynomial-time
solutions for the minimum cut and efficient algorithms exist for finding the shortest
paths, the integrated nature of the Min Cut-Path problem significantly elevates
its computational complexity. Unlike its constituent subproblems, a universally
applicable polynomial-time algorithm for the Min Cut-Path problem in arbitrary
graphs currently remains an open question. This inherent complexity necessitates
a strategic refinement of our approach. To make progress towards computationally
feasible solutions, this chapter adopts a principled strategy: we narrow our focus to
specific, structurally constrained classes of graphs. By exploring the Min Cut-Path
problem within these special classes, we aim to uncover graph structures where
the problem exhibits more tractable behavior, allowing for the design of efficient,
and even polynomial-time, algorithms.

    This chapter marks a strategic shift towards computational feasibility. To
circumvent the inherent computational hardness of the general Min Cut-Path
problem, we direct our attention to specific classes of graphs. By imposing
structural constraints and focusing on graphs with particular properties, we aim
to uncover scenarios where the Min Cut-Path problem becomes more amenable to
efficient algorithmic solutions. This approach is not merely about simplification;
it is a deliberate exploration of the problem’s landscape, seeking out islands of
efficiency within a broader sea of complexity. Specifically, this chapter will delve
into the analysis of the Min Cut-Path problem in graphs with bounded diameter
and graphs with limited cut values. For these specialized graph classes, we will not
only analyze the inherent properties of the Min Cut-Path problem, but crucially,
we will also develop and present dedicated algorithms designed for their efficient
resolution.

3.1 Graphs of Diameter Two

    Having established the general complexities of the Min Cut-Path problem, we
now turn our attention to specific graph classes where we might uncover more
tractable solutions. A natural first step in this direction is to consider a constraint
on the maximum distance between vertices. Limiting the shortest path length
to a maximum of two edges leads directly to the well-known class of graphs with
diameter two, which have been extensively studied in algebraic graph theory [4].
We formally define this class as follows:

Definition 36. A graph G = (V, E) has diameter k if for every pair of vertices
x, y ∈ V , the distance between x and y is at most. Formally:

                                     ∀x, y ∈ V : d(x, y) ≤ k,

where d(x, y) is the distance between the vertices x and y.

                                                  25
    Our objective in this section is to analyze the structural properties of graphs
with diameter two and to take advantage of these properties to derive key theorems.
These theorems will then serve as the foundation for developing a straightforward
and efficient algorithm for solving the Min Cut-Path problem within this specific
class of graphs. As a first exploration of the structural characteristics of these
graphs, we begin by demonstrating a fundamental decomposition property. We
will show that, in any graph, a cut C naturally induces a partition of the set of
vertices into subsets I, J, K, L, providing a basis for further structural analysis.

Claim 12. Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let C be a cut that divides G into two
sets A1 and A2 (i.e., V = A1 ∪ A2 and A1 ∩ A2 = ∅). Then, there exists a unique
decomposition of A1 and A2 into subsets I, J, K, L such that:

   • I ∪ J = A1 I ∩ J = ∅,

   • K ∪ L = A2, K ∩ L = ∅,

   • ∀u ∈ J ∪ K, ∃v ∈ V : (u, v) ∈ C.

   • ∀u ∈ I ∪ L, ∄v ∈ V : (u, v) ∈/ C.

Proof. We prove the claim explicitly by building the sets I, J, K, L and showing
that the decomposition is unique.

   1. Construction of the decomposition:

Algorithm 1 Decomposing the vertex set

Require: Graph G, cut C

Ensure: Partition of V into sets I, J, K, L

1: for each v ∈ V do

2: if v ∈ A1 then

3:   if v has no edges in C then

4:           Assign v to I

5:   else

6:           Assign v to J

7:   end if

8: else if v ∈ A2 then

9:   if v has no edges in C then

10:          Assign v to L

11:  else

12:          Assign v to K

13:  end if

14: end if

15: end for

16: Return sets I, J, K, L

     2. Uniqueness of the decomposition:
           • The assignment of a vertex v to I, J, K, L depends only on its adjacency
               to the edges in C and its membership in A1 or A2.

                                                   26
          • The decision for v does not affect the assignment of any other vertex
              u, as the conditions are local to each vertex.

          • Therefore, this decomposition is unique and well defined.

    With the foundational vertex decomposition established for any graph and
any cut, we now leverage the specific constraint of diameter two to unveil further
structural properties inherent to this class of graphs. Specifically, considering
graphs with diameter two, we can demonstrate that the decomposition induced
by a cut C is not entirely arbitrary. Instead, the limited distances within the
diameter two graphs enforce a more restricted structure on the sets I, J, K, L.
The following claim reveals a significant consequence of this diameter constraint:

Claim 13. Let G = (V, E) be a graph with diameter 2, and let C be a cut that
divides G into two sets A1 and A2 (i.e., V = A1 ∪ A2 and A1 ∩ A2 = ∅). Let
I, J, K, L be the decomposition of A1 and A2 as described in Claim 12. Then, at
least one of the sets I or L is empty. Formally:

                                          I = ∅ ∨ L = ∅.

Proof. Assume for contradiction that both I and L are non-empty. Let u ∈ I and
v ∈ L be arbitrary vertices. By the definition of the decomposition:

   • Any path from u to v must pass through J and K, as no edges in C connect
       I to L directly.

   • Specifically, any path from u to v must contain at least three edges:

          – One edge from I to K,
          – One edge from K to J,
          – One edge from J to L.

Thus, the distance between u and v satisfies:

                                            d(u, v) ≥ 3.

However, this contradicts the assumption that G has diameter 2, since the diameter
requires d(u, v) ≤ 2 for all u, v ∈ V . Therefore, at least one of I or J must be
empty.

    Without loss of generality, and for the sake of simplifying the analysis, we
assume that L = ∅.

    Now, before focusing again on diameter two graphs, we introduce a claim
outlining a key relationship concerning the intersection of the cut and path within
any cut-path, a relationship fundamental to our investigation of the Min Cut-Path
problem.

Claim 14. Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V be two distinct vertices.
Let c(u, v) be a cut that separates u and v, and let p(u, v) be a path that connects
u and v. Then, the intersection of c(u, v) and p(u, v) has an odd number of edges.
Formal ly:

                               |c(u, v) ∩ p(u, v)| ≡ 1 (mod 2).

                                                  27
Proof. Let A1 and A2 be the two sets defined by the cut c(u, v), where u ∈ A1
and v ∈ A2. Consider the path p(u, v) between u and v. Let S = c(u, v) ∩ p(u, v)
be the set of edges at the intersection of the cut and the path.

    Each edge in S changes the "side" of the cut (i.e., switches between A1 and
A2) when traversing the path. Without loss of generality, assume that u ∈ A1
and v ∈ A2. To move from A1 to A2, the number of times the path crosses the
cut must be odd. Specifically:

   • If the path crosses the cut an even number of times, the starting and ending
       sets would be the same (i.e., u and v would both be in A1 or both in A2),
       which contradicts the assumption that c(u, v) separates u and v.

   • Therefore, the path must cross the cut an odd number of times, i.e., |S| ≡ 1
       (mod 2).

Thus, the intersection c(u, v) ∩ p(u, v) has an odd number of edges.

    Building upon the structural insights gained from the previous claims, particu-
larly Claims 13, and 14, we are now poised to determine a precise formula for the
min cut-path value, cp(u, v), in graphs with diameter two. Thanks to the specific
structure of graphs with diameter two , and using the established relationships
between cuts and paths within the cut-path problem, we can now express cp(u, v)
directly in terms of the minimum cut value c(u, v) and the shortest path distance
d(u, v). The following theorem formalizes this crucial result:

Theorem 15. Let G = (V, E) be a connected graph with diameter 2, and let
u, v ∈ V be two distinct vertices. Then, the value of the min cut-path between u
and v satisfies the following:

                                cp(u, v) = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1.

Proof. We distinguish two cases based on the values of d(u, v) and c(u, v).

   1. Case d(u, v) = 1 or c(u, v) = 1:
       By Claim 6, we know states that if d(u, v) = 1 or c(u, v) = 1, then

                                    cp(u, v) = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1.

2. Case d(u, v) = 2 and c(u, v) ≥ 2
   By Claim 7, we have:

         max(c(u, v), d(u, v)) ≤ cp(u, v) ≤ c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1.

We get:

         c(u, v) ≤ cp(u, v) ≤ c(u, v) + 2 − 1 = c(u, v) + 1.

Assume for contradiction that the equation cp(u, v) = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1 =
c(u, v) + 1 does not hold. Then, the min cut-path problem would have the
same size as the min cut, i.e., cp(u, v) = c(u, v). This implies that the path
between u and v is a subset of the minimum cut.

                                     28
By Claim 14, the length of the path in the min cut-path problem must be
at least 3. By Claim 13 and w.l.o.g., the graph can be partitioned into three
sets I, J, K, where u ∈ K. We observe that v ∈ J. Since there exists a path
between u and v in the minimum cut-path, and because this path must lie
within the minimum cut, it follows that vertex v cannot belong to the set I
because the path is a subset of the cut. It follows that v ∈ J. For better
understanding, we provide an illustrative example:

             Figure 3.1 Illustration of Structure Cut-Path

We now estimate cp(u, v):
           cp(u, v) = c(u, v) ≥ deg(u, I) + deg(u, J) + 2 + (|K| − 2),

where the estimation is carried out by decomposing the analysis across the
vertices:

  • deg(u, I) and deg(u, J) denote the number of edges incident from vertex
      u to the opposite side of the minimum cut,

  • from Claim 14 with d(u, v) = 2, any u-v path contained in the cut
      must have length at least three. It follows that there exists at least one
      vertex other than u from the set K that contributes at least two edges
      to the cut,

  • the remaining |K| − 2 vertices from the set K must each contribute at
      least one edge to the cut.

The right-hand side of the inequality is illustrated in red in Figure 3.1.
Simplifying, we obtain:

                       deg(u, I) + deg(u, J) + 2 + (|K| − 2) ≥
           0 + deg(u, J) + deg(u, K) + 1 = deg(u) + 1 ≥ c(u, v) + 1.
This contradicts the assumption that cp(u, v) = c(u, v), proving that the
equation cp(u, v) = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1 must hold.

                                           29
    Having successfully derived a formula for the min cut-path value in diameter
two graphs, we now shift our focus to the minimum cut problem itself within
the same class of graphs. Remarkably, and as we demonstrate with the following
theorem, the minimum cut value c(u, v) in graphs with diameter two can also be
determined very efficiently, even more so than the min cut-path value. In fact, as
the next theorem reveals, the minimum cut between any two vertices u and v in a
diameter two graph is simply determined by the minimum degree of these two
vertices. This surprisingly simple result provides a remarkably efficient method
for computing minimum cuts in this specific graph class.
Theorem 16. Let G = (V, E) be a graph with diameter 2, and let u, v ∈ V be
two distinct vertices. Then, the minimum cut between u and v satisfies:

                                 c(u, v) = min(deg(u), deg(v)).
Proof. Since G has diameter 2, every pair of vertices is adjacent or connected by
a path of length exactly 2. We consider the minimum cut problem between u and
v.

    By Claim 13 and w.l.o.g., the graph can be partitioned into three sets I, J, K,
where u ∈ K. We illustrate this structure:

                          Figure 3.2 Illustration of Structure Cut

    We now estimate c(u, v):
                        c(u, v) ≥ deg(u, I) + deg(u, J) + (|K| − 1),

    where the estimation is carried out by decomposing the analysis across the
vertices:

   • deg(u, I) and deg(u, J) denote the number of edges incident from vertex u
       to the opposite side of the minimum cut,

                                                  30
    • the remaining |K| − 1 vertices from the set K must each contribute at least
       one edge to the cut.

The right-hand side of the inequality is illustrated in red in Figure 3.2. Simplifying,
we obtain:

                             deg(u, I) + deg(u, J) + (|K| − 1) ≥
                        deg(u, I) + deg(u, J) + deg(u, K) = deg(u).
    Thus, we have bounded the cut size by the degree of one of the vertices u or
v. However, there exists a trivial cut that separates u (or v) by removing all its
incident edges, resulting in a cut of exact size deg(u) or deg(v). Since our previous
argument provides a lower bound and this trivial cut gives an achievable upper
bound, it follows that the minimum cut is attained at a vertex with the smallest
degree. Hence, we conclude:

                                 c(u, v) = min(deg(u), deg(v)).

    In conclusion, thanks to Theorems 15 and 16, we have achieved a comprehensive
understanding of both the min cut-path problem and the minimum cut problem
in graphs with diameter two. Specifically, we have shown that for this class
of graphs, the min cut-path value, cp(u, v), is directly expressible in terms of
the minimum cut value c(u, v) and the shortest path distance d(u, v) using the
formula cp(u, v) = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1. Furthermore, we established that the
shortest path distance d(u, v) is trivially determined by checking the presence of
an edge between u and v, and that the minimum cut value c(u, v) is efficiently
computable as the minimum of the degrees of vertices u and v. These results
not only provide valuable theoretical insights into the structure of diameter two
graphs but also offer a foundation for efficient algorithmic approaches to the Min
Cut-Path problem in this specific, yet important, class of graphs.

3.2 Graphs with Cut-Value at Most Two

    Having thoroughly examined the implications of diameter constraints on
the Min Cut-Path problem, we now direct our attention to another significant
structural property that offers potential for algorithmic simplification. If limiting
the diameter of a graph to two allowed us to identify efficient solutions, it is
natural to consider the effect of bounding the value of minimum cut between
vertices. Therefore, in this section, we explore graphs characterized by a minimum
cut-value of at most two for any pair of vertices. This constraint which focuses on
the connectivity aspect of the graph, represents another logical progression in our
exploration of specialized graph classes, and promises to reveal further avenues
for developing efficient algorithms tailored to the Min Cut-Path problem.

Claim 17. Let G = (V, E) be a connected graph such that for every pair of distinct
vertices x, y ∈ V , the minimum cut satisfies:

                                             c(x, y) ≤ 2.

Then, the graph G can be decomposed into a collection of disjoint cycles or single
edges, which are connected by points of articulation.

                                                   31
Proof. We prove the theorem in contradiction. Suppose that the graph G cannot
be decomposed into a collection of disjoint cycles or single edges connected by
articulation points. Then, there exist two cycles C1 and C2 in G that share at
least two vertices. It is important to note that these cycles could potentially
contain additional edges. However, for the purpose of this proof, it suffices to
consider only the edges that form the cycle itself.

    We consider a pair of vertices u, v such that both belong to the cycles C1 and
C2, and there exists a direct path between them consisting exclusively of the edges
of C2. If no such path exists, then C2 must be completely contained within C1,
which is not possible. After removing this path from the graph, the entire cycle
C1 remains intact, along with a subset of edges from the cycle C2. Moreover, the
cycle C1 still contains two additional internally edges-disjoint paths between u
and v.

    Therefore, any cut that separates u and v must remove at least three edges:
one from the cycles C2 and two from C1, which contradicts the assumption that
c(u, v) ≤ 2 for all pairs of distinct vertices u, v ∈ V . Therefore, the graph G must
be decomposable into a collection of disjoint cycles or single edges connected by
articulation points.

    Given the established tractability of computing both minimum cut values c(u, v)
and shortest path distances d(u, v), particularly in the context of specialized graph
classes, we now reveal a significant result for graphs where the minimum cut value is
bounded by two: for this class, the value cp(u, v) can be directly expressed in terms
of c(u, v) and d(u, v), thus paving the way for a polynomial-time determination of
cp(u, v).

Theorem 18. Let G = (V, E) be a connected graph such that for every pair of
distinct vertices x, y ∈ V , the minimum cut satisfies:

                                             c(x, y) ≤ 2.

Then, the value of the min cut-path problem between u and v satisfies:

                                cp(u, v) = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1.

Proof. We distinguish two cases based on the values of d(u, v) and c(u, v).

    1. Case d(u, v) = 1 or c(u, v) = 1:
       In this case we again use Claim 6, which states that if d(u, v) = 1 or
       c(u, v) = 1, then:

                                    cp(u, v) = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1.

    2. Case d(u, v) ≥ 2 and c(u, v) = 2
       From Claim 7, we have the bounds:

                     max(c(u, v), d(u, v)) ≤ cp(u, v) ≤ c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1.

       Substituting c(u, v) = 2, this gives:

                                    d(u, v) ≤ cp(u, v) ≤ d(u, v) + 1.

                                                   32
       Assume for contradiction that the formula cp(u, v) = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1 =
       d(u, v) + 1 does not hold. Given the established bounds, the only remaining
       possibility is cp(u, v) = d(u, v). This would imply that the minimum cut is
       contained entirely within a shortest path.

       By Claim 17, the graph can be decomposed into a collection C of disjoint
       cycles or single edges connected by articulation points. Consider a shortest
       path P between u and v.

       This path cannot traverse any single edge Ei of the collection C, since
       doing so would result in a cut of size one, contradicts the assumption that
       c(u, v) = 2. Therefore, this path traverses through a sequence of cycles
       C1, C2, . . . , Ck. If we remove the set of edges that form P within these
       cycles, the remaining edges of C1, C2, . . . , Ck still provide an alternative
       path between u and v.

       Thus, the edges that form the cut cannot be contained in P . This contradicts
       the assumption that the min cut-path consists exactly of the minimum path,
       proving that:

                                    cp(u, v) = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1.

3.3 Diam or Cut 2 Graph

    In the preceding sections, we explored the Min Cut-Path problem under
relatively strict conditions, focusing first on graphs constrained by a maximum
diameter of two (Section 3.1) and subsequently on graphs where the minimum
cut value between any pair of vertices was at most two (Section 3.2).

    These constraints allowed us to derive precise characterizations and efficient
solutions. Now, we transition to a broader, more encompassing class of graphs by
relaxing these requirements.

    In this section, we introduce and analyze graphs that satisfy a combined, less
restrictive property: for any pair of vertices, either their distance is at most two or
their minimum cut value is at most two. This definition naturally yields a wider
family of graphs, potentially sacrificing some of the neat structural properties and
straightforward algorithmic efficiency observed in the previous, more specialized
cases but allowing us to address a larger set of graph structures.

Definition 37. Let G = (V, E) be a graph. We say that G has the diam or cut
2 graph property if for every pair of distinct vertices x, y ∈ V , at least one of the
following conditions satisfies:

                                 c(x, y) ≤ 2 or d(x, y) ≤ 2.

    Unlike the scenarios examined in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, where we successfully
established the elegant formula cp(u, v) = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1 for graphs with a
diameter of two and graphs with a maximum cut value of two, respectively, this
combined diam or cut 2 property introduces more complexity.

    Relaxation of constraints means that this simple relationship between the
minimum cut-path value, the minimum cut value, and the shortest path distance
no longer holds universally for all pairs (u, v) within this broader class.

                                                  33
    The following figure illustrates specific graph instances within this class that
serve as counterexamples, demonstrating scenarios where the aforementioned
formula cp(u, v) ̸= d(u, v) + c(u, v) − 1 fails.

(a) c(u, v) = 2      (b) d(u, v) = 2

Figure 3.3 Counterexample cp(u, v) ̸= d(u, v) + c(u, v) − 1

3.3.1 General Square Graph

    The counterexamples highlight that a direct application of the formula derived
for the more restricted graph classes is insufficient for the diam or cut 2 category,
and we require a more sophisticated approach. This involves constructing a
graph structure, which we will term the general square graph. This carefully
defined structure will allow us to decompose the problem and develop an efficient
algorithmic solution tailored to the unique properties of diam or cut 2 graphs.

    Before formally defining the overall general square graph structure, we first
introduce its fundamental building blocks or pillars. These components, the
general path and the square graph, will be assembled to form the complete
decomposition.

    Let us start with the general path. Informally, think of a general path
between vertices u and v as a specific subgraph H connecting these two vertices.
Within this subgraph, u and v serve as distinct endpoints, each having only
one connection (edge) within subgraph H itself. Importantly, for every edge
{x, y} ⊆ V \ {u, v}, if one of the vertex belongs to VH, then the other must also
belong to VH. We will now define this formally:

Definition 38 (General Path). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V be
two distinct vertices. A subgraph H = (VH, EH) of G is a general path between
u and v if the following conditions hold:

   1. u and v lie in the same connected component of the subgraph H,

   2. deg(u, EH) = 1, deg(v, EH) = 1,

   3. {{x, y} ∈ E | x ∈ VH \ {u, v} ∧ y ∈ V } ⊆ EH,

    Note that, depending on the structure of the graph G, there may exist several,
exactly one, or no general path between a given pair of vertices u and v. One
example of a general path is a single edge connecting u and v.

                 34
    We illustrate a general path as:

                                     Figure 3.4 General Path

    Next, we introduce the square graph. Informally, a square graph H is
a subgraph associated with four specific vertices a, b, c, d (possibly identical)
which must be in VH. First, the distance between pairs {(a, c), (a, d), (b, c), (b, d)}
must each be at most 2 in the original graph G. Importantly, for every edge
{x, y} ⊆ V \ {a, b, c, d}, if one of the vertex belongs to VH, then the other must
also belong to VH and the vertices a, b, c, d retain all possible edges between them
as in the original graph G. Formally:
Definition 39 (Square Graph). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let a, b, c, d ∈ V
be four (possibly identical) vertices. A subgraph H = (VH, EH) of G is a square
graph relative to {a, b, c, d} if:

   1. a, b, c, d ∈ VH ⊆ V ,
   2. In the graph G, ∀(x, y) ∈ {(a, c), (a, d), (b, c), (b, d)} : dG(x, y) ≤ 2,
   3. Ea,b,c,d = {{x, y} ∈ E | x ∈ VH ∧ y ∈ {a, b, c, d}},
   4. Ein = {{x, y} ∈ E | x ∈ VH \ {a, b, c, d} ∧ y ∈ V },
   5. EH = Ea,b,c,d ∪ Ein .
    Note that, depending on the structure of the graph G, there may exist multiple
distinct square graphs relative to the set {a, b, c, d}. Moreover, while there may
be many reasons for the non-existence of a square graph, it is straightforward to
observe that Condition 2 is not satisfied, for instance, when d(a, c) > 2.
    We illustrate a square graph as:

                                     Figure 3.5 Square Graph

    We are now ready to define an edge-set decomposition of the original graph G,
called the general square graph, as a collection of subgraphs.
Definition 40 (General Square Graph). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let
u, v ∈ V be two distinct vertices. A general square graph H between u and v
is a collection of subgraphs consisting of square graphs and general paths satisfying
the following conditions:

                                                  35
   1. There exist k ≥ 2 square graphs S1, S2, . . . , Sk, where each Si is a square
       graph with designated vertices ai, bi, ci, di.

   2. The first square graph S1 contains u as its designated vertices, specifically
                                               u = a1, = b1.

   3. The last square graph Sk contains v as its designated vertices, specifically
                                               v = ck, = dk.

   4. For each 1 ≤ j ≤ k − 1, there exist two general paths:
          • a general path Pj,1 connecting cj to aj+1,
          • and a general path Pj,2 connecting dj to bj+1.

   5. The collection H = {S1, P1,1, P1,2, S2, P2,1, P2,2, . . . , Pk−1,1, Pk−1,2, Sk} satis-
       fies:
                                                G = ⋃︂ X,

                                                                                 X ∈H

       that is, the union of all subgraphs in the collection H reconstructs the original
       graph G.
   6. Each edge e ∈ E(G) belongs to exactly one subgraph X ∈ H.
       Note: In the following discussions, whenever we refer to critical vertices,
       we mean the collection of all vertices ai, bi, ci, di across all square graphs Si
       in general square graph.
    We illustrate a general square graph as:

                              Figure 3.6 General Square Graph

    For a clearer understanding of the decomposition of a general square graph,
we present an illustrative decomposition:

Figure 3.7 An Example of a Decomposition of a Graph into a General
Square Graph

                                                  36
    In order to facilitate a better understanding of these newly introduced concepts,
we present an alternative decomposition of the same graph into a general square
graph, where the vertices b and c are placed in the interior of the square graph:

Figure 3.8 Another Example of a Decomposition of The Same Graph into
a General Square Graph

    This general square graph structure, representing a decomposition of the
original graph into square graphs and general paths, is the cornerstone of efficient
solving of the Min Cut-Path problem within the class of graphs diam or cut
2. Its specific construction allows us to develop the polynomial-time algorithms
presented in the subsequent sections.

3.3.2 Tranformations

    Building on the concept of a general square graph, we now turn to its decom-
position. Rather than tackling the problem as a whole, we break it down into
smaller, more intuitive steps, each designed to simplify the construction process.
Throughout this chapter, we will consider the case where c(u, v) = 2.

    As a first step, we slightly weaken the original concept in order to facilitate
a clearer and more transparent understanding of the underlying algorithmic
principles.

    Specifically, we introduce the notion of a pseudo-general square graph, which
follows exactly the same structure as a general square graph, except that it consists
of pseudo-square graphs instead of true square graphs. We now formally define
the concept of a pseudo-square graph:
Definition 41 (Pseudo-Square Graph). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let
a, b, c, d ∈ V be four (possibly identical) vertices. A subgraph H = (VH, EH) of G
is a pseudo-square graph relative to {a, b, c, d} if:

   1. a, b, c, d ∈ VH ⊆ V ,
   2. Ea,b,c,d = {{x, y} ∈ E | x ∈ VH ∧ y ∈ {a, b, c, d}},
   3. Ein = {{x, y} ∈ E | x ∈ VH \ {a, b, c, d} ∧ y ∈ V },
   4. EH = Ea,b,c,d ∪ Ein .
    Note: A pseudo-square graph is a square graph without the distance constraint
d(x, y) ≤ 2 between its designated vertices.
    We observe that every general square graph is, in particular, a pseudo-general
square graph. Consequently, all the results and claims that we establish for

                                                  37
pseudo-general square graphs will remain valid for our final decomposition into a
general square graph.

    The following claim will assist us in the analysis by showing that the critical
vertices must lie on edge-disjoint u-v paths.

Claim 19. Let G be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V (G) be two distinct vertices. Let
H = {S1, P1,1, P1,2, S2, P2,1, P2,2, . . . , Pk−1,1, Pk−1,2, Sk} be a pseudo-general square
graph decomposition of G between u and v, and let p1 and p2 be edge-disjoint u-v
paths in G. Then, for every pseudo-square graph Si of the decomposition, the
vertices ai, bi, ci, di all lie on the union of the paths p1 ∪ p2.

Proof. Assume for contradiction that there exists a pseudo-square graph Si such
that one of its designated vertex x ∈ {ai, bi, ci, di}, does not lie on either path p1
or p2. Since x is not contained in p1 ∪ p2, none of the edges incident to x belong
to p1 or p2.

    In the structure of a pseudo-general square graph, the transition from Si to
Si+1 must occur via the vertices ci and di, through the general paths Pi,1 and Pi,2,
respectively. From this it follows that both the paths p1 and p2 must transition
from Si to Si+1 through exactly one of the paths Pi,1 or Pi,2. However, by definition,
each general path Pi,1 and Pi,2 is such that at the vertex of the transition, it has
degree one. Therefore, at the point of transition, there is no possibility for two
edge-disjoint u-v paths to simultaneously pass through the same general path.

    This contradicts the assumption that p1 and p2 are edge-disjoint u-v paths in
G. Hence, every designated vertex ai, bi, ci, di must lie on p1 ∪ p2.

    For algorithmic clarity, I assume further that graph G is connected, although
it does not have to be, because disconnected parts simply have no impact on
finding the min cut-path. In order to guarantee a complete decomposition into a
pseudo-general square graph, all these vertices end up on some general path.

    The decomposition process is based on the application of a sequence of trans-
formations. Now, we focus on describing a sequence of transformations that
systematically decompose an initial pseudo-general square graph into simpler sub-
graphs. Each transformation implicitly replaces one current original pseudo-square
graph with newly created subgraphs, and the output of each transformation
consists of references to the new pseudo-square graphs, which serve as input for
subsequent transformations.

    It is important to note that, by Menger’s Theorem 2 with property c(u, v) = 2,
there exist two edge-disjoint u-v paths, denoted p1 and p2, which we will fix and
frequently refer to in the analysis. Although these paths are not explicitly required
within the individual transformations themselves, they play a crucial role in the
overall structure of the decomposition.

    We assume that S is part of the current decomposition and that the paths p1
and p2 pass through S. Furthermore, we assume that the graph G is connected.

    Each transformation operates on a given pseudo-square graph S, and is param-
eterized by two edges of the cut {e1, e2} and two vertices x ∈ {a, b} and y ∈ {c, d},
which are separated in the graph S by the cut {e1, e2}.

                                                  38
                                      Transformation A

    Transformation A, depicted in Figure 3.9, is designed to decompose a
pseudo-square graph S by separating the vertex pairs (a, b) from (c, d). This
separation is achieved through the edges of the cut {e1, e2}, which are in the
pseudo-square graph. Crucially, these two edges are used to define two disjoint
general paths, each containing one of the cut edges. By removing {e1, e2}, the
pseudo-square graph is naturally partitioned into two subgraphs S1 and S2. These
subgraphs inherit all the structural properties required by the definition of a
pseudo-square graph. The edges e1 and e2 form a new general path P1,new, P2,new
between S1 and S2.

    Figure 3.9 Transformation A

Algorithm 2 Transformation A

Require: Graph G, pseudo-square graph S, edges of the cut e1, e2 ∈ E(S),
    vertices x ∈ {a, b}, y ∈ {c, d}

Ensure: Two pseudo-square graphs S1, S2
 1: Initialize H ← G

2: E(H) ← E(H) \ {e1, e2}                          ▷ Remove cut edges
3: Initialize Hx ← x-connected component in H  ▷ Find via BFS from x
4: Initialize Hy ← y-connected component in H  ▷ Find via BFS from y

5:

 6: Initialize pseudo-square graph S1 ← Hx ∩ S
 7: Initialize pseudo-square graph S2 ← Hy ∩ S
 8: Initialize general path Pnew,1 ← e1 ▷ First general path between S1 and S2
 9: Initialize general path Pnew,2 ← e2 ▷ Second general path between S1 and S2
10: Return S1, S2

    Correctness:
    We show that replacing S with the subgraphs S1, S2 and the two general paths
P1,new, P2,new preserves the structure of the pseudo-general square graph.
    The transformation is correct because of the following observations. Since
the edges cut {e1, e2} are internal edges of the pseudo-square graph S, the cut
induced by their removal is entirely contained within S. Due to Claim 19, the
vertices a, b, c and d are located on p1 and p2. The paths p1 and p2 ensure that
the vertices a, b and c, d remain properly connected through the partial segments
of p1 and p2.
    Specifically, the partial paths from u to a and b, and from c and d to v, are
preserved by removing {e1, e2}. Consequently, the cut defined by {e1, e2} separates
the components containing a and b from those containing c and d, respectively.

                                                  39
    The edges P1,new and P2,new correspond directly to the single edges e1 and e2,
thus trivially satisfying the requirements for general paths in the definition.

    Finally, applying BFS starting from the vertices x and y, the components Hx
and Hy are correctly identified, ensuring that the resulting subgraphs S1 and S2
satisfy all the conditions of a pseudo-square graph.

                                      Transformation B

    Transformation B, illustrated in Figure 3.10, addresses scenarios in which
one vertex of the set {a, b, c, d} becomes isolated from the remaining three vertices
due to the cut defined by e1 and e2. This transformation focuses on extending a
general path by incorporating this newly separated vertex and its associated
edges. The edges {e1, e2} form a new general path Pnew and a pseudo-square
graph S1 .

    Figure 3.10 Transformation B

Algorithm 3 Transformation B

Require: Graph G, pseudo-square graph S, edges of the cut e1 ∈ E(S), e2 ∈/ E(S),
    vertices x ∈ {a, b}, y ∈ {c, d}

Ensure: Pseudo-graph S1
 1: Initialize H ← G

2: E(H) ← E(H) \ {e1, e2}                          ▷ Remove cut edges
3: Initialize Hx ← x-connected component in H  ▷ Find via BFS from x
4: Initialize Hy ← y-connected component in H  ▷ Find via BFS from y

5:

 6: Hxy ← Hx or Hy which does not contain any vertex from {a, b, c, d} \ {x, y}
 7: Find a general path P contain a vertex from Hxy
 8: Initialize general path Pnew ← (Hxy ∩ S) ∪ P ▷ Extension of a general path
 9: Initialize pseudo-square graph S1 ← S \ Hxy ▷ Shrinking of the extended part

10: Return S1

    Correctness:

    We show that replacing S with the reduced pseudo-square graph S1 together
with the extended general path preserves the pseudo-general Pnew.

    Similarly to the previous transformation, after the removal of the first edge,
which lies inside the pseudo-square graph S, all the vertices a, b, c, d remain
connected with the paths p1 and p2 due to the Claim 19.

                              40
    However, by removing the second edge, which lies outside of the pseudo-square
graph S, the situation changes: one of the vertices in a, b, c, d becomes isolated
from the others. The algorithm then uses BFS to identify which of the vertices
has been separated.

    The key property is that this isolated vertex can be the property that extended
the corresponding general path using the remaining edge of the cut inside S. Thus,
the newly formed general path still satisfies the definition required for general
paths in the decomposition.

    Moreover, the structure of the remaining pseudo-square graph is preserved,
except that it becomes slightly smaller.

                                      Transformation C
    Finally, Transformation C, illustrated in Figure 3.11, addresses the case
where both the cut edges e1 and e2 lie outside the current pseudo-square graph.
Applying Claim 19, we can conclude that there exist specific pairs of vertices
inside the pseudo-square graph that must remain connected. The decomposition
correctly identifies these connections and, instead of keeping the original pseudo-
square graph, replaces it with the appropriate linking of general paths. he edges
{e1, e2} form new general paths P1,new and P2,new.

                                 Figure 3.11 Transformation C

                                                  41
Algorithm 4 Transformation C

Require: Graph G, pseudo-square graph S, edges of the cut e1, e2 ∈/ E(S),
    vertices x ∈ {a, b}, y ∈ {c, d}

Ensure:

1: Initialize H ← G

2: E(H) ← E(H) \ {e1, e2}                          ▷ Remove cut edges
3: Initialize Hx ← x-connected component in H  ▷ Find via BFS from x
4: Initialize Hy ← y-connected component in H  ▷ Find via BFS from y

5:

6: Hx ← Hx ∩ S

 7: Hy ← Hy ∩ S
 8: Px,1, Px,2 ← general paths that share a common vertex with Hx
 9: Py,1, Py,2 ← general paths that share a common vertex with Hy
10: Initialize general path P1,new ← Hx ∩ Px,1 ∩ Px,2 ▷ First bridging between the

    remaining pseudo-square graphs

11: Initialize general path P2,new ← Hy ∩ Py,1 ∩ Py,2 ▷ Second bridging between
    the remaining pseudo-square graphs

12: Return

    Correctness:
    We show that replacing S with the two general paths P1,new, P2,new.
    The correctness of the transformation follows from the Claim 19 and the
structural properties of the pseudo-square graph S. Since there are no cut-edges
inside S, and the paths p1 and p2 must traverse through S, they necessarily
connect some pairs of vertices from {a, b} to {c, d}.
    By performing BFS, the algorithm detects which pairs of vertices are con-
nected, leading to the decomposition of S into two connected components. These
components are then used to form two new general paths, corresponding to the
segments of the original paths that entered and exited S.
    Both newly constructed general paths satisfy all the properties required accord-
ing to the definition, ensuring that the pseudo-general square graph decomposition
is correctly preserved after transformation.
    Polynomial-Time Complexity of Transformations A, B, and C:
    Since the transformations do not contain any cyclic structures and each
transformation consists of statements that are O(1), the overall running time
can be determined by identifying the most computationally expensive statement
among them. In each case, the most time-consuming statement is the application
of a BFS algorithm to find the connected components. Since the graph under
consideration has at most O(n2) edges, the time complexity of a single BFS
statement is O(n2). Therefore, each transformation runs in polynomial time.

3.3.3 Polynomial-Time Construction of General Square

          Graph

    Having defined the transformations in the previous subsection, a natural and
crucial question arises: can we efficiently construct this decomposition from a
given graph that satisfies the diam or cut 2 property?

    This subsection affirmatively answers this question, demonstrating that such a
construction is indeed possible in polynomial time.

                                                  42
    We begin by describing the core idea behind the algorithm. The algorithm
operates first by embedding the entire input graph into a single pseudo-square
graph structure. This initial embedding trivially satisfies all the conditions of
the pseudo-general square graph definition, except the number of pseudo-square
graphs, which must be at least two by definition.

    To address these remaining conditions, the algorithm applies a sequence below
described graph transformations A 3.9, B 3.10 or C 3.11 that incrementally de-
compose the initial graph into smaller subgraphs. Each transformation is designed
to reduce the subgraph size while preserving the relevant structural constraints.
First of all, we apply Transformation A to ensure that the decomposition yields
at least two pseudo-square graphs, thus satisfying the first condition.

    Subsequently, we iteratively apply transformations to each pseudo-square graph
in order to further decompose it into smaller components. This process continues
until every resulting pseudo-square graph is sufficiently small to meet the stricter
requirements of the square graph.

Algorithm 5 Constructing a General Square Graph Decomposition

Require: Graph G = (V, E) with property diam or cut 2, vertices u, v ∈ V such

     that c(u, v) = 2

Ensure: A decomposition G into a valid square general graph between u and v.

1: Initialize pseudo-square graph Sinitial with a = u, b = u, c = v, d = v and
   V = V (G).

2: e1, e2 ← min cut(u, v)

3: S1′ , S2′ ← TransformationA(G, Sinitial, e1, e2, u, v).
4: Initialize S ← {S1′ , S2′ }.
5: while S is not empty do

6: Swork ← select and remove pseudo-square graph from S.
7: for each pair (x, y) in {(a, c), (b, d), (a, d), (b, c)} do

8:          if d(x, y) > 2 then ▷ Checking if a pseudo-square graph is a square

     graph

9:          e1, e2 ← min cut(x, y)              ▷ Edges e1 and e2 are within Swork

     intesection general paths that connects to this pseudo-square graph.

10:         Count ← count(e1, e2 ∈ Swork)

11:         switch Count do

12:                 case 0

13:                    TransformationC(G, Swork, e1, e2, x, y)

14:                 case 1

15:                    S1′ ← TransformationB(G, Swork, e1, e2, x, y)

16:                    Add S1′ to S.

17:                 case 2

18:                    S1′ , S2′ ← TransformationA(G, Swork, e1, e2, x, y)

19:                    Add S1′ , S2′ to S.

20:         break

21:         end if

22: end for

23: end while

24: Return the constructed general square graph.

                                            43
       Intuition of correctness. Each transformation ensures that at least
       one vertex is incorporated into a general path, after a finite number
       of iterations, the size of each remaining pseudo-square graph must
       become sufficiently small. In particular, the distances between any
       two critical vertices within a pseudo-square graph will eventually be
       at most two, thereby fulfilling the structural requirements of a general
       square graph.

    However, it is important to emphasize a key prerequisite for the construction
presented here. It specifically applies to pairs of vertices (u, v) for which the
minimum cut condition holds, i.e., c(u, v) = 2. We now present the following
proposition along with an algorithm that constructs a general square graph in
polynomial time.

Theorem 20. Let G = (V, E) be a graph satisfying the diam or cut 2 graph
property. Then, for distinct vertices u, v ∈ V such that c(u, v) = 2, the graph G
admits a decomposition into a general square graph between u and v.

Proof. We verify the correctness and polynomial-time complexity of the algorithm.

   1. Correctness:

          • By Claim 19, we know that in every iteration, all critical vertices are
              contained within the union of the two edge-disjoint u-v paths p1 and
              p2. Since decomposition requires separating these critical vertices,
              it follows that after removing a single edge from either p1 or p2, the
              resulting subgraph remains connected. Otherwise, if the removal of a
              single edge disconnected the graph, the minimum cut between u and v
              would be of size one, contradicting the assumption that c(u, v) = 2.

          • Therefore, whenever the algorithm seeks two cut edges e1 and e2 in the
              current pseudo-square graph, it is guaranteed that such a pair exists.
              Furthermore, by construction, the search for these edges is only invoked
              when the current pseudo-square graph admits a u-v cut of size at most
              two. Consequently, we are assured that precisely two such cut edges
              are found at each step.

          • Once the appropriate cut edges e1 and e2 are identified, the algorithm
              applies the corresponding transformation (Transformation A, B, or C)
              depending on the relative positions of e1 and e2 within the structure.
              Each transformation has been designed to preserve the defining proper-
              ties of a pseudo-square graph, thus ensuring that the decomposition
              remains consistent throughout the process.

          • The algorithm terminates when every pseudo-square graph becomes
              sufficiently small to satisfy the strict definition of a square graph. At
              this point, the entire decomposition forms a valid general square graph,
              as required.

   2. Polynomial-Time Complexity:

                                                  44
          • The number of iterations of the while loop is bounded by the fact that
              in each step, either a new pseudo-square graph is created or the number
              of vertices in the general path increases by 1. Since both the number
              of pseudo-square graphs and the number of vertices in the general path
              are bounded by n (the total number of vertices), the maximum number
              of while loop iterations is 2n.

          • In each iteration, we check at most 4x(number of pseudo-square graphs),
              which is bounded by 4n.

          • Finding the minimum cut takes polynomial time (e.g., using an algo-
              rithm like the Edmonds-Karp algorithm for maximum flow, which runs
              in O(n3)), and each transformation takes constant time.

          • The complexity of the transformation is O(n2)
          • Therefore, the overall complexity is:

                                  O(2n) × O(4n) × O(n3 + n2) = O(nk),

              where k is a constant. This proves that the algorithm is polynomial-
              time.

3.3.4 Polynomial-Time Algorithm for Min Cut-Path in
          Diam or Cut 2 Graph

    Now that we have established the existence and polynomial-time constructabil-
ity of the general square graph decomposition for graphs satisfying the diam or
cut 2 property (specifically when c(u, v) = 2), we can leverage this structure to
devise an efficient algorithm for the Min Cut-Path problem itself.

    The core idea is to use the decomposition provided by the general square graph
to break down the global problem into a series of localized checks within each
constituent square graph.

    The following claim states that even within the square graphs Si themselves,
we do not always have to find the shortest path.

Claim 21. Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let u, v ∈ V be two distinct vertices.
Let H = {S1, P1,1, P1,2, S2, P2,1, P2,2, . . . , Pk−1,1, Pk−1,2, Sk} be a decomposition of
G into generalized square graphs between u and v. Then, for any shortest u − v
path P in G, the following holds:

                                 ∀Si ∈ H : |E(Si) ∩ E(P )| ≤ 2

Proof. Assume for contradiction that there exist a subgraph Si ∈ H, vertices
(x, y) ∈ {(ai, ci), (ai, di), (bi, ci), (bi, di)}, and a shortest path P such that |E(Si) ∩
E(P )| > 2.

    We distinguish two cases based on the distance dSi(x, y) in Si:

   1. Case dSi(x, y) ≤ 2.
       In this case, the path between x and y within Si has at most two edges. If
       we replace the segment of P between x and y by the shorter path inside Si,
       we obtain a shorter u-v path, contradicting the minimality of P .

                                                  45
   2. Case dSi(x, y) > 2.
       In this case, by the definition of a square graph, any path of length at most
       two between x and y thus the path must leave Si and use general paths.
       Since general paths contain at least one edge, to travel from x to y through
       external paths, at least two general paths must be used, one to exit Si and
       one to reenter it.
       Without loss of generality, assume that x = bi and y = ci and that the
       external path exits Si through bi. Thus, ci−1 is identified with di−1 because
       I used both general paths. The vertices ai and ci are identified (ai = ci)
       because we have used all the edges on the general path and cannot continue.

Figure 3.12 Reason Why The Shortest Path Between Any Two Vertices of
Si Must Have Length at Most 2.

       Then, as illustrated in Figure 3.12, the path P from di−1 to bi, and then
       from bi to ci, must use at least four edges. If we replaced this segment by
       the direct connection between ci−1 = di−1 by a direct edge do bi = ci, we
       would use only one edge, thus shortening P by at least three edges. This
       again contradicts the assumption that P is a shortest path.

Therefore, in both cases, we reach a contradiction. Thus, for every Si ∈ H, we
have |E(Si) ∩ E(P )| ≤ 2.

    Instead of analyzing the entire graph G at once, we focus on examining the
paths within each Si of the decomposition. Within every square graph Si, we can
efficiently determine if there exists a shortest path segment (between two of its
defining vertices, say x and y) that simultaneously serves as a cut that separates
the other two defining vertices (α and β). If such a path segment exists anywhere
along the chain of square graphs and aligns with the overall shortest path between
the original vertices u and v, we can conclude that cp(u, v) = d(u, v). Otherwise,
cp(u, v) = d(u, v) + 1.

    This approach of decomposing the problem and performing local checks within
the structured components leads directly to the polynomial-time algorithm for-
malized in the following theorem.

Theorem 22. Let G = (V, E) be a graph satisfying the property diam or cut
2 graph. Then, for every pair of distinct vertices u, v ∈ V such that c(u, v) = 2,
the value cp(u, v) can be computed in polynomial time.

Proof. Based on Theorem 20, we know that for a graph G with the diam or cut
2 property, there exists a decomposition into a general square graph. We utilize

                                                  46
this property to construct a polynomial-time algorithm for computing the value
of cp(u, v).

Algorithm 6 Polynomial-time algorithm for computing cp(u, v) in a graph with

the diam or cut 2 property and c(u, v) = 2

Require: Graph G = (V, E) with property diam or cut 2, vertices u, v ∈ V such

     that c(u, v) = 2

Ensure: Value of cp(u, v)

1: Compute d(u, v) using breadth-first search

2: Construct the general square graph H from G on vertices u, v

3: S ← ∅

4: for all square graphs Si in H do
5: S ← S ∪ {Si}
6: end for

7: for all Si ∈ S do
8: for all possible vertex pairs (x, y) as per Definition 39 do

9:        {α, β} ← the remaining two vertices of Si

10:       P ← the set of all shortest paths ≤ 2 between x and y ▷ We compute

     the shortest path within the square graph Si.

11:       for all p ∈ P do

12:          if α and β are in different components after removing the edges of

     path p then

13:               res ← d(u, x) + d(x, y) + d(y, v)

14:               if res = d(u, v) then

15:                    return d(u, v)

16:               end if

17:          end if

18:       end for

19: end for

20: end for

21: return d(u, v) + 1

     1. Correctness:
        According to the Claim 21, for the shortest path segments in the respective
        Si, it is sufficient to check up to a maximum length of 2.
        We show that the algorithm correctly determines the value of cp(u, v). We
        know from Claim 7 that:

                                     d(u, v) ≤ cp(u, v) ≤ d(u, v) + 1

        By Theorem 20, there exists a decomposition of graph G into a general
        square graph. The value cp(u, v) equals d(u, v) if and only if there exists a
        path that:

           • is part of the shortest path between u and v,
           • upon removal, separates the remaining two vertices (α and β) into

               different components.

                                                   47
       If no such path exists in any square graph, an alternative path connecting u
       and v can be found, ensuring that the cut is not a subset of the shortest
       path, using connectivity (α and β). The algorithm systematically:

          • iterates through all square graphs Si,
          • examines all vertex pairs (x, y),
          • evaluates all shortest paths between x and y,
          • checks whether removing any of these paths separates the remaining

             vertices α and β,
          • if such a path is found, sets cp(u, v) = d(u, v), otherwise, cp(u, v) =

             d(u, v) + 1.

   2. Polynomial-Time Complexity:
       Each step of the algorithm runs in polynomial time:

          • Constructing the general square graph takes O(nk).
          • The first for loop runs at most O(n) iterations, as each Si contains at

             least one vertex of G.
          • The second for loop has a constant size of 4 (for the four pair vertices

             in a square graph), i.e., O(1).
          • Finding all shortest paths is at worst O(n2), as the maximum path

             length is at most 2.
          • Checking whether vertices α, β are in the same component takes O(n2).
          • Computing the shortest path takes O(n2).

       Therefore, the overall complexity is:

                                                O(nk + n7).

3.3.5 Linear-Time Algorithm for Min Cut-Path with Gen-
          eral Square Graph Decomposition

    In the preceding subsection (Section 3.3.4), we demonstrated the feasibility of
solving the Min Cut-Path problem in polynomial time for graphs possessing the
diam or cut 2 property, contingent upon the c(u, v) = 2 condition and leveraging
the general square graph decomposition.

    Although polynomial time is a significant theoretical achievement, we can
further refine this approach to achieve an even more efficient solution. Building
upon the foundation of the structure of general square graph (which we now assume
has been precomputed or is given as part of the input, based on the construction
in Section 3.3.3), and incorporating dynamic programming techniques to optimize
distance calculations between the components of the decomposition, we can achieve
a linear-time algorithm with respect to the number of edges in the graph. This
enhancement significantly improves the practical applicability for large graph
instances. The following theorem details this linear-time result.

                                                  48
Theorem 23. Let G = (V, E) be a graph satisfying the property diam or
cut 2 graph. Then, for every pair of distinct vertices u, v ∈ V such that the
decomposition H of G between u and v, where H is a general square graph, the
value cp(u, v) can be computed in O(|E|) time.

Proof. First, the algorithm solving this problem will be presented, followed by a
proof of its correctness and complexity analysis.

Algorithm 7 Linear-time algorithm for computing cp(u, v) in a graph with the
diam or cut 2 property and H as a general square graph

Require: Graph G = (V, E), vertices u, v ∈ V , general square graph H
Ensure: Value of cp(u, v)

 1: Compute d(u, v) using BFS
 2: S ← ∅
 3: for all square graphs Si in H do
 4: S ← S ∪ {Si}
 5: end for
 6: Compute distance tables D1, D2 using dynamic programming, where:

     • D1[x] stores d(u, x) for all x ∈ G

     • D2[x] stores d(x, v) for all x ∈ G

7: for all Si ∈ S do
8: for all possible vertex pairs (x, y) as per Definition 39 do

9:   {α, β} ← the remaining two vertices of Si

10:  P ←∅

11:  P ← P ∩ last edge of path α and x

12:  P ← P ∩ last edge of path α and y

13:  P ← P ∩ last edge of path β and x

14:  P ← P ∩ last edge of path β and y

15:  if the shortest path distance from x to y is ≤ 1 then

16:          P ← the unique shortest path

17:  else

18:          Ensure all partial paths in P are of length 2; if not, remove edges

     violating this.

19:  end if

20:  for all p ∈ P do

21:          if α and β are in different components after removing the vertices

     of path p then

22:          res ← D1[x] + d(x, y) + D2[y]

23:          if res = d(u, v) then

24:                   return res

25:          end if

26:          end if

27:  end for

28: end for

29: end for

30: return d(u, v) + 1

                                    49
1. Correctness:
   Similar to Theorem 22, the algorithm correctly determines the value of
   cp(u, v) using the general square graph H. The main difference is the use of
   dynamic programming, which allows efficient distance calculations.
   A crucial part of the correctness proof is the reduction of potential paths
   between x, y to at most four options. These paths are the only relevant
   candidates because:

      • To disconnect α and β, the removal of either edge (x, z) or (z, y) must
          be sufficient.

      • If there exist multiple ways to reach x or y, removing (x, z) or (z, y)
          would still leave an alternative connection, keeping α and β in the same
          component.

      • If there exist multiple ways to reach x or y, removing (x, z) or (z, y)
          would still leave an alternative connection, keeping α and β in the same
          component.

      • Therefore, only four candidate paths need to be checked for their effect
          on the connectivity between α and β.

   If a valid path p is found, the algorithm correctly returns cp(u, v) = d(u, v).
   Otherwise, by definition, cp(u, v) = d(u, v)+1, which the algorithm correctly
   outputs as the fallback value.

2. Linear-Time Complexity:

      • Computing d(u, v) using BFS takes O(E).
      • Constructing the dynamic tables D1, D2 for all square graphs takes

          O(2E).
      • Iterating through all square graphs Si, each containing at most Ei

          edges. For each Si:
            – The number of possible pairs (x, y) is always 4.
            – Finding all candidate paths between x, y: O(4Ei).
            – Checking whether α, β remain connected: O(4Ei).
            – Computing res using D1, D2 is O(1).

   The time complexity of a single iteration is:

                                   O(4Ei + 4Ei + 1) = O(Ei)

   The overall complexity sums over all Si:

                                     O(E + ∑︂ Ei) = O(E)

   which is linear in the number of edges.
   Thus, the algorithm runs in linear time and efficiently computes cp(u, v).

                                              50
    In summary, this section significantly expanded our analysis of the Min Cut-
Path problem by considering the broader class of diam or cut 2 graphs. We
established that, under the condition c(u, v) = 2, it is possible to construct a
specialized decomposition, the general square graph, in polynomial time. Using
this decomposition, we first developed a general polynomial-time algorithm and
subsequently refined it to achieve a highly efficient linear-time algorithm O(|E|)
for computing cp(u, v).

    Although the requirement c(u, v) = 2 was necessary for these efficient algo-
rithmic constructions, it represents a reasonable trade-off, allowing us to address
a wider range of graphs compared to the strictly diameter-constrained or cut-
constrained classes analyzed earlier. This exploration demonstrates the power of
identifying and exploiting specific structural properties within graph classes to
overcome computational challenges.

                                                  51
4 Min Cut-Path Problem in

Random Graphs

    In the previous chapters, we examined classes of graphs in which certain
optimization problems can be solved efficiently. However, in general, it is not
clear whether, for every graph and given problem, there exists a polynomial-time
algorithm that provides an optimal solution. Therefore, in this chapter, we focus
on analyzing to what extent these problems can be solved efficiently and how well
an optimal solution can be approximated on average.

    For this purpose, we introduce Erdős– Rényi random graphs [5], which
allow us to analyze the structural properties of graphs and their impact on the
computational complexity of algorithms solving the Min Cut-Path problem.
Specifically, we will investigate the properties of random graphs in the context of
algorithmic classes with nearly polynomial-time complexity, average-case compu-
tational complexity, and approximation schemes.

Definition 42 (Erdős–Rényi Random Graph). Let n ∈ N and p ∈ [0, 1]. The
Erdős–Rényi random graph, denoted by G(n, p(n)), is a graph with n vertices where
each edge between two distinct vertices is included independently with probability
p. Formally:

    • The vertex set is V = {1, 2, . . . , n},

    • For each pair of distinct vertices u, v ∈ V , the edge {u, v} is included in E
       with probability p, independently of all other edges.

4.1 Time Complexity Classes for Random Graph
       Algorithms

    In this chapter, we introduce an extended terminology regarding algorith-
mic complexity, focusing on cases where worst-case analysis does not provide a
meaningful characterization of practical performance. Instead of analyzing the
most challenging instances of graphs, we shift our attention to the average-case
complexity [6], which better reflects the behavior of algorithms in typical instances
of random graphs.

    The Min Cut-Path problem remains computationally challenging even in
the context of random graphs. However, we can guarantee an algorithm with
a runtime that, while slightly more polynomial, is still significantly faster than
exponential-time methods. This motivates the introduction of the concept of
an almost polynomial algorithm [7], which is widely used in modern algorithmic
research.

Definition 43 (Almost Polynomial Algorithm). An algorithm A is called an
almost polynomial algorithm if its running time TA(n) satisfies

                                     TA(n) ∈ O(︂nO(log log n))︂.

This time complexity is slightly more polynomial, but still subexponential.

                                                   52
Definition 44 (Average-Case Algorithm). An algorithm A is called an average-
case algorithm if there exists, for each input size n, a subset of inputs Iopt(n) on
which the algorithm produces an optimal solution, while I(n) denotes the set of
all inputs of size n, and it holds that

           lim      |Iopt(n)|  =  1.
                     |I (n)|
           n→∞

This means that asymptotically the algorithm produces optimal results for almost
all inputs.

Definition 45 (Almost Polynomial Average-Case Algorithm). An algorithm A is
called an almost polynomial average-case algorithm if it possesses the following
properties:

1. Average-Case Algorithm: For each input size n, there exists a subset of
   inputs Iopt(n) ⊆ I(n) on which A produces an optimal solution, and

              lim |Iopt(n)| = 1.
              n→∞ |I(n)|

2. Almost Polynomial Algorithm: The running time TA(n) of A satisfies
                                     TA(n) ∈ O(︂nO(log log n))︂.

Definition 46 (Average (1 + ϵ)-Approximation Scheme). Let ϵ > 0. An algorithm
A is called an average (1 + ϵ)-approximation scheme if it meets the following
criteria:

1. A is a polynomial-time algorithm, i.e., its running time is O(P (n)) for some
   polynomial P (n).

2. For each input size n, there exists a subset of inputs IAopt(n) ⊆ I(n) such
   that for every input x ∈ IAopt(n) the output S = A(x) satisfies

    S   <  1  +  ϵ  (for minimization problems)
OPT(x)

                 OPT(x) < 1 + ϵ (for maximization problems),
                      S

where OPT(x) denotes the optimal value for the input x.

3. In addition, the algorithm is an average-case in the sense that:

              lim   |IAopt(n)|    =   1.
                     |I (n)|
              n→∞

                    53
4.2 Diameter of Erdős-Rényi G(n, 1/c) Graphs

As a first step in our analysis, we examine the structural properties of dense

random graphs, specifically those with a high edge probability p. A well-known

result in the theory of random graphs states that an Erdős–Rényi random graph

G(n, p)  with   p  =  1  (where    α  >   0   is  a  constant)         almost     surely  has  diameter  2  in
                      α
the asymptotic limit [5].

In the context of the Min Cut-Path problem, this property is particularly

insightful, as it allows us to take advantage of the efficient methods developed in

Chapter 3 Section 3.1 to solve the problem in graphs of diameter 2. One of the

key results enabling this is Theorem 15, which shows that when the graph has

diameter 2, the value of the min cut-path between any two vertices u and v can

be computed in polynomial time via the simple formula:

                                cp(u, v) = c(u, v) + d(u, v) − 1.

    This characterization provides an immediate and efficient way to compute the
min cut-path in such graphs, making it a powerful tool for average-case analysis
in dense random graphs.

Theorem 24. Let G(n, p(n)) be an Erdős–Rényi random graph with n vertices

and  edge  probability   p(n)   =   1  ,  where      α  >   0   is  a  constant.   Then,       the  probability
                                    α
that G(n, p(n)) has diameter 2 converges to 1 as n → ∞. Formally:

                         lim        P     [︃                1 ))    =   ]︃  =  1.
                                                            α
                         n→∞               diam(G(n,                   2

Proof. Let G(n, p) be an Erdős–Rényi random graph with n vertices and edge

probability  p  =  1  ,  where  α  >   0  is  a   constant.
                   α
For any pair of distinct vertices u, v ∈ V :

• The probability that u and v are not directly connected is:

                                          P [(u, v) ∈/ E] = 1 − p.

• The probability that u and v do not share a common neighbor: For each
   other vertex w ∈ V \{u, v}, the probability that w is not a common neighbor
   is (1 − p2). Thus:

                      P [no w is a common neighbor] = (1 − p2)n−2.

• The probability that d(u, v) > 2 is:
                            P [d(u, v) > 2] = (1 − p) · (1 − p2)n−2.

The expected number of such pairs is:

                      E[#d(u,   v)    >   2]  =   (︄n)︄  ·  (1  −   p)  ·  (1  −  p2)n−2.
                                                    2

We apply:                           (1 − p2)n−2 ≤ e−p2(n−2).

                                                     54
Thus:                                                                  n2
                                                                       2
                                   E[#d(u, v)               >  2]  ≤       ·  (1  −  p)  ·  e−p2n.

Since  p  =  1       is  a   constant,          the     exponential        term    e−p2n        decays     rapidly  to  0,  while
             α
the polynomial term n2 grows slowly. Therefore:

                                lim E[#d(u, v) > 2] = 0.

                                               n→∞

By Markov’s inequality:

                                   P [diam(G(n, p)) > 2] ≤ E[#d(u, v) > 2].

Since the right-hand side converges to 0, we have:

                                             lim     P  [diam(G(n,         p))  >    2]  =  0,

                                             n→∞

and thus:

                                             lim     P  [diam(G(n,         p))  =    2]  =  1.

                                             n→∞

4.3 Properties of Erdős-Rényi Random Graphs

This chapter investigates the structural properties of the sparse Erdős–Rényi

random    graphs         G(n, p)          with       p  =   α log n  (where     α  >     0  is  a  constant).     The   primary
                                                               n
focus is on fundamental results concerning the diameter and the minimum cut

of such graphs. Although these results are well-established in the literatures [5,

8], this chapter provides a concise overview, highlighting the statements relevant

to the analysis of the Min-Cut Path problem. To maintain clarity and brevity,

only the necessary theorems are stated, with proofs omitted except for one result

regarding edge connectivity c(u, v) between arbitrary pairs of vertex.

Theorem 25 (Connectivity). Let G(n, p(n)) be an Erdős–Rényi random graph

with  p(n)   =       α  log  n  ,  where     α   >      1.  Then:
                         n

                                          lim P [G is k-edge-connected] = 1,

                                          n→∞

where k = δ(G) denotes the minimum degree of G.

Theorem 26 (Diameter). Let G(n, p(n)) be an Erdős–Rényi random graph with

p(n)  =   α  log  n  ,  where      α  >      1.  Then:
              n

                                                 [︄                             log n ]︄
                                                                              log log n
                                   lim       P       diameter      of  G   ≤                    =  1.

                                   n→∞

Theorem 27 (Largest Component). Let G(n, p(n)) be an Erdős–Rényi random

graph  with  p(n)            =     αlogn  ,  where      α   >  1.    Then:
                                      n

                         lim         [︂              component         of  G  has    size   Θ(n    2   ]︂  =  1.
                                                                                                   3
                                   P largest                                                          )
                         n→∞

                                                                     55
Theorem 28 (Degree Concentration). Let G(n, p(n)) be an Erdős–Rényi random

graph with

                                  p(n)  =  α  log n
                                                    ,
                                              n

where α > 1 is a fixed constant. Then, for any fixed ϵ > 0, it holds that

            (︃                                                          )︃

lim P ∀v ∈ V (G) : (1 − ϵ)α log n ≤ deg(v) ≤ (1 + ϵ)α log n = 1.

n→∞

    The preceding results provide structural constraints on connectivity or the
diameter of the graph. However, we must make these findings applicable in the
context of the Min Cut-Path problem. The following claim establishes bounds on
the value of c(u, v):

Claim  29.  Let   G(n, p(n))  be  an  Erdős–Rényi  random  graph  with  p(n)  =  α  log  n  ,
                                                                                     n
where α > 1. Consider two randomly chosen vertices u, v ∈ V (G). For every

ϵ > 0, there exists n0 such that for all n > n0, the edge connectivity between u

and v satisfies:

                  (︃                                         )︃

            lim P (1 − ϵ)α log n ≤ c(v, v) ≤ (1 + ϵ)α log n = 1.

            n→∞

Proof. From Theorem 25 with Theorem 28, we know that the graph G(n, p) is
k-edge-connected with high probability, where (1 − ϵ)α log n ≤ k ≤ (1 + ϵ)α log n.
This implies that for all pairs of vertices u, v, the edge connectivity satisfies:

            c(u, v) ≥ min c(x, y) ≥ min deg(z) ≥ (1 − ϵ)α log n.
                      x,y∈V (G)         z∈V (G)

    Since the edge connectivity is determined by the minimum number of edges
that must be removed to disconnect two vertices, we observe that providing a
specific cut may not yield the minimum possible value. However, it gives an upper
bound. In particular, for the given pair (u, v), the degree constraint implies

                      c(u, v) ≤ deg(u) ≤ (1 + ϵ)α log n

By combining these two inequalities, we obtain the desired result:

                  (1 − ϵ)α log n ≤ c(u, v) ≤ (1 + ϵ)α log n

4.4 Average-Case Approximation for Min Cut-
       Path in Erdős-Rényi Graphs

    Based on known results on the diameter and connectivity of Erdős–Rényi
random graphs, we can estimate the expected deviation from the optimal solution.
Specifically, the combination of the minimum cut and shortest path solutions leads
to an approximation scheme. Using the diameter bound from Theorem 26 and
the connectivity concentration from claim 29, we ensure that the approximation
ratio remains within a factor of (1 + ϵ) in average-case. This guarantees that the
proposed approach qualifies as an average (1 + ϵ)-Approximation Scheme.

                                                  56
Theorem  30.      Let  G(n, p)  be   an  Erdős–Rényi       random   graph          with   p      ≥  α  log  n  ,  where
                                                                                                        n
α > 1. Then the algorithm that combines the solutions for the min cut and the

min path problem is an Average (1 + ϵ)-Approximation Scheme.

Proof. Since the probability p increases, the length of the shortest path decreases.
From Theorem 26, we obtain the bound:

                            d(u, v)  ≤   diameter   of  G  ≤    log n
                                                              log log n.

Using claim 29, we can bound the edge connectivity:

                                c(u, v) > (1 − ϵ′)α log n.

From Claim 7, we have:

                                        c(u, v) ≤ cp(u, v).

All conditions are satisfied except for the third one, which we resolve by substitut-

ing:

           S(x)        ≤    c(u, v) + d(u, v)       ≤  (1  −  ϵ′)α  log    n    +       log n    =
         OPT(x)                   c(u, v)                                             log log n

                                                              (1 − ϵ′)α log n

                                             log n

                                1+      (1    log log n    ≤  1  +  ϵ.

                                            − ϵ′)α log n

Thus, we conclude that the algorithm achieves a Average (1 + ϵ)-Approximation
Scheme.

4.5 Almost Polynomial Average-Case Approxi-
       mation Algorithm in Erdős-Rényi Graphs

     By demonstrating an efficient solution for dense graphs in Section 4.2, we can

propose a slightly less time-efficient algorithm for sparse graphs, which remains

significantly more efficient than exponential solutions. This algorithm, analyzed in

the average-case, falls into the category of almost polynomial algorithms. Given

the   properties  of   the  Erdős–Rényi      model     with   p  =      α  log  n  ,  we  can       estimate         an
                                                                            n
upper bound on its computational complexity and show that it performs efficiently

on almost all inputs. Conversely, in the subcritical regime where α < 1, the

probability of a path existing between randomly chosen vertices asymptotically

approaches zero, making the algorithm inapplicable in such cases.

Theorem  31.      Let  G(n, p)      be   an  Erdős–Rényi      random            graph     with         p  =       α  log  n  ,
                                                                                                                      n
where α > 1. Then there exists an almost polynomial algorithm that serves as an

average-case algorithm.

Proof. We describe an algorithm that we analyze as an almost polynomial-time
algorithm, which exhibits behavior characteristic of an average-case algorithm.

                                             57
Algorithm 8 Path-Cut

Require: Random graph G(V, E), vertices u, v ∈ V (G)

Ensure: Value cp(u, v)

1: c ← c(u, v)                                        ▷ Minimum cut between u and v

2: d ← d(u, v)                          ▷ Shortest path distance between u and v

3: cp ← ∞

4: Paths = all u-v paths with length ≤ c + d

5: for each path P in Paths do

6: Create graph H

7: V (H) ← V (G)

8: E(H) ← E(G) \ P

9: Cut ← c(u, v) in H                         ▷ New minimum cut in modified graph

10: if cp > Cut + |P | then

11:  cp ← Cut + |P |

12: end if

13: end for

14: return cp

     1. Correctness:

        The algorithm computes cp(u, v) by iterating through all u-v paths P with
        length ≤ c(u, v) + d(u, v). From Theorem 10, it follows that at least one of
        the paths must be a partial solution to the cut − path problem. By Claim 7,
        the path length in any cut-path satisfies:

                                  |P | ≤ c(u, v) + d(u, v).

     Since the algorithm checks all paths up to this upper bound, it necessarily
     includes the optimal path-cut combination. The minimality follows from
     the exhaustive search over all valid candidates.

     2. Time Complexity:

     • Computing c(u, v) (Karger’s algorithm) and d(u, v) (BFS) takes O(nk).

     • Path enumeration is bounded by degree constraints. From Theorem 28,

     we know that in an Erdős–Rényi random graph G(n, p) with p(n) =

     α log n    and   α  >  1:
        n

                                ∆ = max deg(v) ≤ (1 + ϵ)α log n.
                                          v∈V

     The number of paths of length ≤ c + d is thus bounded by:

     c+d                                (︂                 n)O(α log n))︂            (︂nO(log log n))︂

     ∑︂        ∆k  ≤  (c+d)·∆c+d  =  O   ((1  +  ϵ)α  log                  =      O                     .

     k=1

     • Each iteration computes a minimum cut in H in O(nk′).

     Total complexity:
                         O (︂nk + nO(log log n) · nk′ )︂ = O (︂nO(log log n))︂ ,

     satisfying the almost polynomial definition.

                                        58
3. Average-Case Justification:
   The algorithm succeeds on almost all inputs, where ∆ ≤ (1 + ϵ)α log n. By
   Theorem 28, this occurs with probability:

                                lim P(∆ ≤ (1 + ϵ)α log n) = 1.

                                                n→∞

   Thus, the algorithm is correct and efficient for asymptotically almost all
   inputs.

In      the  Erdős–Rényi  model,      when    the  edge     probability      is  given      by  p(n)    =     α log n
                                                                                                                 n
with α < 1, the graph is known to lose connectivity. This property is crucial in

the analysis of cut-paths, which are defined when two vertices u and v belong

to the same connected component, guaranteeing the existence of a path between

them.

Claim   32.  Let  G(n, p)     be  an  Erdős–Rényi        random      graph       with    p  =   α  log  n  ,  where
                                                                                                    n
α < 1. Then for uniformly random vertices u, v ∈ V (G):

                                      (︂                         )︂

                              lim P cp(u, v) is defined = 0.
                              n→∞

Proof.  For  p(n) =  α log n  with    α   < 1,  the  graph   is      in  the    subcritical     regime.           By
                        n
Theorem 27:

             lim       [︂         component        of    G  has  size       Θ(n  2   ]︂  =  1.
                                                                                 3
                     P largest                                                      )
             n→∞

For uniformly random u, v:

                                          (︂         )︂ (︂                                                    )︂

P(u and v are connected) ≤ P u ∈ V · P v ∈ largest component of G .

Probability v is in the largest component and u ∈ V :

                                          (︂         )︂

                                          P u∈V =1

                     P(u  ∈   largest     component      of  G)  ≤      Θ(n  2  )/n.
                                                                             3

Thus:                                                                            2
                                                                                 3
             lim  P(u and v       are connected) ≤           lim     1   ·  Θ(n     )/n  =  0
             n→∞                                             n→∞

Since u and v are, with high probability, in different components, the probability

of the existence of a path between u and v is low. Consequently, it is highly

unlikely to find a valid cut-path.

Hence:                                (︂                         )︂

                              lim P cp(u, v) is defined = 0.
                              n→∞

                                                59
5 Min Cut-Path Problem: The
c(u, v) = d(u, v) = cp(u, v) Case

    In this section, we analyze a specific setting in which the notions of cut, distance,
and cut-path between a pair of vertices coincide, that is, c(u, v) = d(u, v) =
cp(u, v).This scenario captures instances in which a single path simultaneously
represents both a minimum cut and a shortest path between the designated
vertices.

    A min cut-path is any cut-path S ∈ cut-path(u, v) such that |S| = cp(u, v).
That is, a min cut-path has minimal size among all cut-paths from u to v, and is
therefore optimal with respect to both distance and cut.

    The notion of a symmetric cut-path graph serves as a structural condition
to identify graph instances in which the quantities c(u, v), d(u, v), and cp(u, v)
coincide. That is, it characterizes graphs where every minimum cut-path from
u to v simultaneously realizes the minimum cut and the shortest path between
the endpoints. In contrast, maximum independent path graph serves a more
algorithmic purpose: it defines a subgraph in which all feasible solutions must
be contained. This key property, established in claim 33, allows us to restrict
the analysis of cut-paths to a significantly smaller subgraph. These two notions
are therefore essential: the former captures a special symmetry of the instance,
while the latter delimits the domain in which optimal solutions can be effectively
sought.

Definition 47 (Symmetric Cut-Path Graph). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and
let u, v ∈ V be two distinguished vertices. The graph G is called a symmetric
cut-path graph between u and v if the following equality holds:

                    c(u, v) = d(u, v) = cp(u, v).

Definition 48 (Max Independent Path Graph). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and

let u, v ∈ V be two distinguished vertices. A collection P = {P1, P2, . . . , Pk} of
pairswise internally edge-disjoint u-v paths in G is called maximum if k is as

large as possible.

We define the max independent path graph between u and v, denoted by

GP = (VP, EP), as the subgraph of G induced by the union of all paths in maximum

P, that is,

                    k    k

                    VP = ⋃︂ V (Pi) and EP = ⋃︂ E(Pi).

                    i=1  i=1

    Note: An oriented max independent path graph is a max independent
path graph where we assign an orientation to each path Pi ∈ P from u to v.

5.1 Fundamentals of c(u, v) = d(u, v) = cp(u, v)
       Case

    Before delving into the design of algorithms to determine whether a graph
constitutes a Symmetric Cut-Path Graph for a given pair of vertices u, v, it is

                                                  60
essential to establish several fundamental claims. These preliminary results will
provide a clearer perspective and assist in the subsequent analysis of algorithmic
approaches.
Claim 33. Let G = (V, E) be a symmetric cut-path graph between distinct vertices
u, v ∈ V . Let GP = (VP, EP) be a max independent path graph between u and v
in G.

    If S ⊆ E is a min cut-path, then S ⊆ EP.
Proof. Assume, in contradiction, that the statement is false. Then there must
exist an edge on the min cut-path S that is not part of the max independent path
graph GP. This would imply that the size of the min cut-path within GP is at
most c(u, v) − 1. However, with only c(u, v) − 1 edges, it is not possible to form
a valid cut in GP, meaning that there exists a path between u and v in GP \ S.
Consequently, the same path must also exist in G, contradicting the assumption
that S was a valid cut-path in GP. Thus, our assumption was incorrect, which is
proved by the claim.

    The next two claims presented below highlight a key characteristic of this
problem setting: the potential existence of multiple distinct minimum cut-paths
within graphs where c(u, v) = d(u, v) = cp(u, v).
Claim 34 (2 Min Cut-Path). There exists a Symmetric Cut-Path Graph G =
(V, E) between distinct vertices u, v ∈ V that contains at least two distinct min
cut-paths between vertices u and v.
Proof. To establish the claim, it suffices to construct an explicit example of a
graph that satisfies the stated properties. This example is illustrated in Figure 5.1,
which represents a Symmetric Cut-Path Graph.

    In the figure, the two highlighted paths between the vertices u and v are both
min cut-paths. Furthermore, the five color edge-disjoint paths demonstrate the
existence of sufficiently many independent paths required to satisfy the symmetric
cut-path condition c(u, v) = d(u, v) = cp(u, v).

         Figure 5.1 Example Graph with Two Distinct Min Cut-Paths

    The example in Figure 5.1 will be simplified and represented by the diagram
below:

                                                  61
   Figure 5.2 Abstract Representation of the Structure from Figure 5.1

    For the sake of clarity in the following proof, we consider six edge-disjoint paths
of equal length that share the same initial and terminal vertices, as illustrated in
the diagram below:

Figure 5.3 Abstract Representation of 6 paths

Claim 35 (Many Min Cut-Paths). There exists a Symmetric Cut-Path Graph
G = (V, E) between distinct vertices u, v ∈√ V such that the number of distinct
minimum cut-paths between u and v is 2O( n), where n = |V |.

Proof. Observing that multiple locally optimal solutions exist in a small-scale

structure (as illustrated in Figure 5.1), we can construct a larger graph by chaining

together multiple such substructures in a series, thereby obtaining a graph with

exponentially many distinct min cut-paths. This is depicted in Figure 5.4.

    To formalize this construction, we define √simplified abstract components
denoted as blocks B1, B2, . . . , Bk, where k = n, and each block contains a

localized structure similar to the one shown in Figure 5.2. Each block Bi has
designated endpoints ai and bi, and consecutive blocks are connected so that bi is
adjacent to ai+1 for all i ∈ {1, . . . , k − 1}. The starting and end vertices of the

graph are defined as u = a1 and v = bk.                                     √

From each endpoint ai, there exist 6 edge-disjoint paths to u of length 10 n,

and similarly from each bi to v. This ensures the availability of sufficient con-

nectivity to support a symmetric cut-path structure. For clarity, the simplified

representation of a block is illustrated in Figure 5.4:

Figure 5.4 Illustration of a Graph with Many Min Cut-Paths

                                         62
The total number of vertices in the constructed graph is O(n), and any valid

min cut-path must traverse all blocks B1, . . . , Bk. Importantly, if a path were to

bypass the designated block  structure   bwyouuslidngbeedagtelseoaustts1id0e√onf,  the blocks or the
connections between them,    its length                                            which is strictly

greater than the optimal length achievable via the internal block structure. In

contrast, using t√he shortest internal path through each block yields a total path
length of only 6 n − 1.

This implies that every min cut-path must be constructed by selecting, for

each block Bi, a path from ai to bi that remains entirely within the block. Since

each block contains two distinct such paths (by construction), and the√blocks are
edge-disjoint, the total number of valid min cut-paths is given by 2O( n).

Claim 36 (Local Cut). Let G = (V, E) be a symmetric cut-path graph between
distinct vertices u, v ∈ V , and let GP = (VP, EP) be a max independent path graph
between u and v in G. Consider any vertex x ∈ VP \ {u, v} and a min cut-path S.

    If deg(x, VP) ≤ 4 and (w, x) ∈ S, then there exists a unique edge (y, x) ∈ S
with y ̸= w such that (w, x) and (x, y) are the only edges in S that are incident to
x.

    Note: This claim implies that even without knowing the full structure of
the min cut-path S, the knowledge of a single edge (w, x) ∈ S helps us infer
information about the remaining edges incident to the vertex x.

Proof. We proceed by a case analysis based on the degree of the vertex x within
the max independent path graph GP:

   1. Case: deg(x, VP) = 0.
       Vertex x is not part of any path in GP, hence no edge incident to x can
       belong to any min cut-path S. The claim holds trivially.

   2. Case: deg(x, VP) = 1 or deg(x, VP) = 3.
       These cases are not possible. Every vertex x ∈ VP \ {u, v} lies on a fixed
       number of edges-disjoint u-v paths. Each path enters and exits x using
       exactly two edges. Therefore, the degree of such a vertex must be even.
       Hence, degrees 1 and 3 are excluded.

   3. Case: deg(x, VP) = 2.
       Let the two edges incident to x in GP be (x, x1) and (x, x2), each belonging
       to a different path Pi since S is the min cut-path. Any path between u and
       v that traverses x must use both edges. However, this would require the
       cut-path S to contain two edges of the same independent path (since both
       edges are part of the same path Pi), which contradicts the minimality cut of
       the cut-path. Therefore, no edge incident to x can belong to a min cut-path
       S, and the claim holds trivially.

   4. Case 4: deg(x, VP) = 4.
       In this case, vertex x lies at the intersection of two edge-disjoint paths. For
       a clearer understanding of the proof, we orient all paths from u to v, trans-
       forming GP into an oriented max independent path graph (see Algorithm 12
       for how this orientation is later utilized).

                                                  63
       As shown in Figure 5.5, there exist precisely two valid configurations of
       edges incident to x that can form part of a minimum cut-path. These
       are represented by the blue and purple cuts in the figure. Each edge
       (w, x) ∈ S belongs to exactly one of these two configurations, and this
       uniquely determines the remaining edges incident to x that must also be
       included in S.

                                         Figure 5.5 Local cut

    In the proof of Claim 36, we can deduce that in an oriented Max Independent
Path Graph, any min cut-path passing through a vertex x must contain two edges
with the same orientation w.r.t.x. This structural insight will be used in the
design of Algorithm 12.

5.2 Algorithmic Solutions for Min Cut-Path in
        c(u, v) = d(u, v) = cp(u, v) Case

    Having established the key theoretical foundations in the previous section, we
are now ready to turn our attention to algorithmic approaches to solving this
particular variant of the problem. In what follows, we present two algorithms
that aim to identify minimum cut-paths in the case where the input graph is a
symmetric cut-path: the Filter-BFS algorithm and the Local-Cut algorithm.
We will describe how each algorithm works, explain the ideas behind their design,
and discuss their strengths and limitations, especially in terms of correctness and
computational efficiency. Moreover, if neither algorithm finds a valid solution,
this means that the input graph is not a symmetric cut-path.

5.2.1 Filter-BFS Algorithm

    A fundamental algorithm for solving shortest path problems in unweighted
graphs is the Breadth-First Search (BFS), which systematically explores the
graph to identify shortest paths from a given source vertex. The Filter-BFS
algorithm builds on the core principles of BFS but modifies it significantly to
address the specific requirements of the min cut-path problem in the case where
c(u, v) = d(u, v) = cp(u, v).

    The goal is to identify paths that are simultaneously the shortest with respect
to distance and induce a minimum u-v cut. This adaptation is primarily achieved
through the incorporation of two specialized filtering procedures, Filter-Cut
(Algorithm 9) and Filter-Path (Algorithm 10), which are applied during the

                                                  64
exploration phase of the route. These filters eliminate partial paths that cannot
be extended into valid solutions based on whether they satisfy both the minimum
cut and minimum distance conditions.

Algorithm 9 Filter-Cut

Require: Graph G(V, E), list of paths P , vertices u, v ∈ V , cut value c

Ensure: Filtered list of paths P ′

1: P ′ ← ∅

2: for each path p in P do

3: Create graph H

4: H(V ) ← G(V )

5: H(E) ← G(E) \ p

6: cut ← c(u, v)                        ▷ Minimum cut in graph H

7: if c = cut + |p| then

8:  P ′ ← P ′ ∪ {p}                     ▷ Keep cut if equality holds

9: end if

10: end for

11: return P ′

Algorithm 10 Filter-Path

Require: Graph G(V, E), list of paths P , vertices u, v ∈ V , path length d
Ensure: Filtered list of paths P ′

1: P ′ ← ∅

2: for each path p in P do

3: Create graph H

4: H(V ) ← G(V )

5: x ← p[−1]                            ▷ Last vertex of the path p

6: path ← d(x, v)                       ▷ Min path in graph G

7: if d = path + |p| then

8:  P ′ ← P ′ ∪ {p}                     ▷ Keep path if equality holds

9: end if

10: end for

11: return P ′

    During its execution, the main Filter-BFS algorithm (Algorithm 11) main-
tains lists Π[z] for each vertex z, accumulating candidate paths from the source u
to z. As paths are extended edge by edge using a priority queue ordered by path
length (mimicking BFS), the filters are invoked. Only paths that satisfy both
filter conditions are retained in Π and considered for further extension. Conse-
quently, the final list Π[v] contains the identified minimum cut-paths. Although
the Filter-Cut procedure is crucial to ensure that the final paths meet the cut
requirement, Filter-Path acts primarily as an optimization during the search.
It helps to avoid exploring path extensions towards vertices that, based on current
path length, could not possibly lead to an overall shortest path to v, effectively
steering the search away from branches that are distancing themselves from the
target vertex v in terms of path length.

                                    65
Algorithm 11 Filter-BFS Algorithm

Require: Graph G(V, E), vertices u, v ∈ V

Ensure: List of valid min cut-paths between u and v

1: c ← c(u, v)

2: d ← d(u, v)

3: for all v ∈ V do

4: Π[v] ← ∅                                          ▷ Initialize all path sets

5: dist[v] ← ∞                                       ▷ Distance estimate

6: end for

7: Π[u] ← {⟨u⟩}                                      ▷ Initialize trivial path

8: dist[u] ← 0

9: Q ← Queue()

10: Q.enqueue(u)

11: while Q ≠ ∅ do

12: w ← Q.dequeue()

13: Apply Filter-Cut(G, {Π[w]}, u, v, c) → Fcut
14: Apply Filter-Path(G, Fcut, u, v, d) → Π[w]
15: for all neighbor z of w do

16:  if dist[z] = ∞ then                             ▷ First visit to z

17:         dist[z] ← dist[w] + 1

18:         Q.enqueue(z)

19:  end if

20:  if dist[z] = dist[w] + 1 then         ▷ Maintain only shortest paths

21:         for all π ∈ Π[w] do

22:               Π[z] ← Π[z] ∪ {π ⊕ z}              ▷ Extend each path

23:         end for

24:  end if

25: end for

26: end while

27: return Π[v]

5.2.2 Local-Cut Algorithm

    Compared to the Filter-BFS algorithm, the Local-Cut algorithm is based
on a considerably more straightforward principle. In particular, it explores only
the paths contained in the maximal independent path graph. Starting from a
vertex u, the algorithm attempts to extend each of its incident edges by exploring
candidate min cut-paths in the oriented version of the maximal independent path
graph. The key observation, following from Claim 36, is that if the graph GP
has maximum degree four, then at every internal vertex there exists at most one
possible candidate for the next edge along a potential min cut-path.

                                   66
Algorithm 12 Local Cut

Require: Vertices u, v ∈ V , oriented max independent path Graph GP
Ensure: List of potencional min cut-paths in G

1: Initialize Results ← ∅

2: d ← d(u, v)                                     ▷ Min path in GP
3: P ← ∅                                                    ▷ Path list

4: for all neighbor z of u do                      ▷ Initial edges from u

5: P ← P ∪ {⟨u, w⟩}

6: end for

7: for all paths p ∈ P do

8: for k = 1 to d − 1 do              ▷ Extend paths up to length d

9:   (w, x) ← last-edge(p)

10:  o ← orientation(w, x)

11:  candidates ← {z | (z, x) ∈ E(GP), orientation(x, z) = o, z ≠ w}

12:  if |candidates| = 1 then         ▷ The only case where the path can be

     expanded, according to Claim 36

13:          z ← the single element in candidates

14:          p←p⊕z

15:  else                  ▷ Path cannot be expanded or degree is greater than 4

16:          break

17:  end if

18: end for

19: Results ← Results ∪ {p}

20: end for

21: return Results

     Intuition of correctness. Thanks to Claim 36, once the path leaves
     the start vertex u, every subsequent vertex x in the oriented max
     independent path graph has at most one permissible outgoing edge
     that remains on a min cut-path. In other words, after choosing an
     initial edge at u, the path can never branch again it either continues
     along that unique extension or terminates. This property bounds the
     total number of candidate paths to at most O(n) and guarantees that
     the Local-Cut algorithm only explores each once.

5.2.3 Polynomial Cases: Nearly k-Regular Graphs

    Before analyzing the efficiency of the individual algorithms, we introduce a spe-
cific class of graphs. Under certain assumptions, the algorithms will demonstrate
efficient behavior when applied to graphs from this class.
Definition 49 (Nearly k-Regular Graph). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let
u, v ∈ V be two distinguished vertices. The graph G is called nearly k-regular
if every vertex in V \ {u, v} has degree at most k, i.e.,

                                 ∀w ∈ V \ {u, v} : deg(w) ≤ k.

    The following theorem demonstrates that, when restricted to the class of nearly
5-regular graphs, the Filter-BFS algorithm efficiently enumerates all potential
min cut-paths within polynomial time.

                                                  67
Theorem 37. Let G = (V, E) be a graph with distinguished vertices u, v ∈ V , and
suppose that G is nearly 5-regular. Then, the Filter-BFS algorithm determines
in polynomial time whether G is a Symmetric Cut-Path Graph between u and v.
If it is, the algorithm also finds all corresponding minimum cut-paths.

Proof. First, we observe that the given graph has a specific structure. If we
construct the max independent path graph GP, we obtain an almost 4-regular
graph.

   1. Correctness:
       The Filter-BFS algorithm follows a modified breadth-first search (BFS)
       approach, enriched with filtering techniques that systematically eliminate
       incorrect solutions, ensuring the accuracy of the algorithm and that only
       valid solutions are produced.
       Specifically, upon reaching the target vertex v, the candidate paths are
       subjected to the Filter-Cut and Filter-Path procedures to rigorously
       verify their minimality as both a cut and a path, respectively, thus confirming
       their status as a min cut-path.

   2. Polynomial Time Complexity:

          • Decomposition of Complexity: The algorithm consists of three
              key components: BFS traversal, filtering mechanisms, and list size
              management.

          • Bound on List Sizes: Outside the max independent path graph GP,
              list sizes remain zero due to Theorem 33.

          • Bound on Path Expansion: Since the maximum degree in VP \{u, v}
              is at most 4, Theorem 36 implies that, except for the terminal vertices
              u and v, the formation of minimal paths cannot involve branching. The
              Filter-Cut procedure enforces this constraint by explicitly filtering
              out branching possibilities (note that this filter is even stronger, as the
              theorem requires only a local version of the cut property, not a global
              one). As a consequence, the only possible branching point is the vertex
              u, which implies that there are at most n minimal paths. Hence, in
              every vertex, there can be at most O(n) such paths.

          • Overall Complexity Estimate:
              The total complexity of the algorithm can be bounded in a straightfor-
              ward manner by observing that from each vertex, we apply two filters
              to each element in its associated list. Since we can bound the list size
              per vertex, the total time is at most:

              max list size per vertex × (filter-cut + filter-path) × number of vertices

                                 = O(n) × O(nk + nk′) × O(n) = O(nk′′).

       Since all steps execute within polynomial time, the algorithm runs in poly-
       nomial time.

                                                  68
    The following theorem establishes that the Local-Cut algorithm, operating
on the oriented max independent path graph, is able to identify O(n) potential
candidates for a min cut-path in the original graph, provided that the graph G is
symmetric cut-path.

    It is worth emphasizing that, if the original graph is nearly 5-regular, the
construction of a max independent path graph is nearly 4-regular. In this setting,
the number of potential candidates that satisfy the condition c(u, v) = d(u, v) =
cp(u, v) remains small, and the verification of each candidate is immediate and
computationally trivial.

Theorem 38. Let G = (V, E) be a graph with distinguished vertices u, v ∈ V .
Let GP = (VP, EP) be an oriented max independent path graph between u and v
in G, and suppose that GP is nearly 4-regular. Then, the Local-Cut algorithm
generates a list of candidate min cut-paths in polynomial time for graph G. The
number of candidate min cut-paths generated is at most O(n).

Proof. We prove the correctness and polynomial-time complexity of the algorithm

   1. Correctness:
       To argue the correctness of the algorithm, we rely on the structural impli-
       cation of Theorem 36. The algorithm proceeds by treating each vertex as
       a potential starting edge of a minimal cut-path, resulting in at most O(n)
       candidate paths. Due to the local cut constraint guaranteed by the theorem,
       the expansion of any such path is uniquely determined: for each edge along
       a candidate path, there exists at most one possible continuation.
       Consequently, the algorithm correctly identifies at most O(n) min cut-paths,
       and none of these paths can branch into multiple options. This guarantees
       correctness.

   2. Polynomial-Time Complexity:

          • At most O(n) candidate paths are generated.
          • Each path has a length O(n), and extending a path by one edge takes

              O(1) time.
          • Overall Complexity:

                                            O(n) × O(n) = O(n2).

       Thus, the Local-Cut algorithm terminates in polynomial time.

5.2.4 Limitations of Filter-BFS and Local-Cut Algorithms

    Although the preceding subsection established the polynomial-time efficiency
of the Filter-BFS and Local-Cut algorithms for specific classes of graphs,
namely those that are nearly 5-regular (for Filter-BFS) or a nearly 4-regular

                                                  69
oriented max independent path graph GP (for Local-Cut). We now turn our
attention to the specific shortcomings of each algorithm.

    The Filter-BFS algorithm guarantees the correctness by systematically
exploring the paths using a BFS approach combined with the Filter-Cut and
Filter-Path mechanisms. However, its general efficiency is severely hampered
by its objective to find all possible minimum cut-paths between the designated
vertices u and v. As established in Claim 35, the number of distinct minim√um
cut-paths can be exponential in the size of the graph, potentially reaching 2O( n).
Consequently, even if the path generation were efficient, the sheer volume of the
output can lead to exponential space requirements for storage. This inherent
need to potentially enumerate an exponential number of solutions prevents the
Filter-BFS algorithm from achieving polynomial-time complexity in the general
case.

    The Local-Cut algorithm offers a potentially faster approach by directly
tracing paths within the oriented max independent path graph GP. Its efficiency
is heavily dependent on the structural property suggested by claim 36. Although
this holds in well-structured cases such as nearly 4-regular graphs, this assumption
fails in general graphs. For example, in dense graphs like the complete graph Kn,
a vertex x within GP might have multiple outgoing edges satisfying the orientation
criteria. The algorithm’s reliance on a unique successor path breaks down in such
scenarios, potentially causing it to miss valid minimum cut-paths or even fail
to find any solution, thus compromising its correctness for general graphs with
high-degree vertices.

                                                  70
Conclusion

    This thesis embarked on an exploration of the Min Cut-Path problem, a
combinatorial optimization challenge arising from the integration of fundamental
graph-theoretic concepts: paths and cuts. We aimed to understand the struc-
tural properties and algorithmic complexity inherent in requiring an edge set to
simultaneously facilitate connection through a path and enforce separation via
a cut between two designated vertices, u and v. The inherent tension between
these two objectives makes the Min Cut-Path problem significantly more complex
than the well-understood problems of finding shortest paths or minimum cuts
independently.

    Throughout this work, we have systematically investigated the Min Cut-Path
problem across various settings, achieving several key results that contribute to
its understanding:

   • We established foundational properties and bounds for the Min Cut-Path
       value cp(u, v), clarifying its relationship, and often its distinction, from
       d(u, v) and c(u, v).

   • A main contribution of this thesis lies in the analysis of Min Cut-Path on
       special graph classes. While demonstrating tractability for graphs with
       diameter two and graphs with cut at most two, our most significant result in
       this area concerns the broader class of diam or cut 2 graphs. For instances
       where c(u, v) = 2, we introduced the novel concept of general square graph
       decomposition and leveraged it to develop a polynomial-time algorithm.
       This demonstrates that Min Cut-Path can be solved efficiently even when
       neither the diameter nor the cut value is universally bounded by two across
       the entire graph, provided the condition holds for the specific vertex pair or
       the graph satisfies the combined property.

   • We extended our analysis to the average-case behavior using Erdős-Rényi
       random graphs. An average-case (1 + ϵ)-approximation scheme was shown,
       guaranteeing near-optimal solutions on average. For sparse graphs above
       the connectivity threshold (p = c log n/n, c > 1), we developed an almost
       polynomial-time average-case algorithm, suggesting that Min Cut-Path is
       often manageable in typical sparse network scenarios.

   • Finally, we characterized the intriguing symmetric case where c(u, v) =
       d(u, v) = cp(u, v). We provided structural insights and developed polynomial-
       time algorithms capable of recognizing this property and finding all minimum
       cut-paths within the specific context of nearly 5-regular graphs.

    In summary, this thesis advances the understanding of the Minimum Cut-Path
problem by identifying key graph structures and scenarios where efficient solutions
are possible. The development of a polynomial-time algorithm for the non-trivial
diameter or cut 2 class, under the specific assumption c(u, v) = 2, stands out
as a primary contribution, showcasing how structural decomposition can lead to
tractability. It should be noted that this work does not resolve the entire diameter
or cut 2 class, and handling the complementary case where d(u, v) = 2 remains

                                                  71
an important open direction. The average-case analyses further complement this
by indicating efficiency in random graph models.

    Despite these advances, several avenues remain open for future research. Deter-
mining the precise computational complexity of the general Min Cut-Path problem,
potentially proving its NP-hardness, remains the most prominent open question.
Developing approximation algorithms with provable performance guarantees for
general graphs would also be highly valuable. Furthermore, extending the anal-
ysis to other significant graph classes (e.g., planar graphs, bounded treewidth
graphs) or exploring weighted and directed variants of the Min Cut-Path problem
could yield deeper insights into this complex interplay between connection and
separation in networks.

                                                  72
Bibliography

1. Diestel, Reinhard. Graph Theory. 6th. Heidelberg: Springer, 2023. Graduate
     Texts in Mathematics, no. 173. isbn 978-3-662-67631-2.

2. Cormen, Thomas H.; Leiserson, Charles E.; Rivest, Ronald L.; Stein,
     Clifford. Introduction to Algorithms. 4th. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2022.
     isbn 978-0-262-53989-5.

3. Diez, David M.; Barr, Christopher D.; Çetinkaya-Rundel, Mine. Open-
     Intro Statistics [https://www.openintro.org/book/os/]. 4th. OpenIntro,
     2022. isbn 978-1-943450-07-7.

4. Godsil, Chris; Royle, Gordon. Algebraic Graph Theory. Vol. 207. Springer,
     2001. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. isbn 978-0-387-95220-9.

5. Bollobás, Béla. Random Graphs. 2nd. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press, 2001. isbn 978-0-521-79722-1.

6. Roughgarden, Tim. Beyond the Worst-Case Analysis of Algorithms. Cam-
     bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021. isbn 978-1-108-87803-4.

7. Lange, Julian. Properly learning decision trees in almost polynomial time.
     arXiv preprint. 2021. Available from arXiv: 2109.00637.

8. Frieze, Alan; Karoński, Michał. Introduction to Random Graphs [online].
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016 [visited on 2023-11-15]. isbn
     978-1-107-11850-6. Available from: https://www.math.cmu.edu/~af1p/
     BOOK.pdf.

                                                  73
List of Figures

    1.1 Spanning Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
    1.2 Contraction of edge e . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
    2.1 Edges Incident to Vertex u Forming a Tree-Cut . . . . . . 20
    2.2 Example of Weighted Graph Showing t(G) ≠ tc(u, v) . . . . 20
    3.1 Illustration of Structure Cut-Path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
    3.2 Illustration of Structure Cut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
    3.3 Counterexample cp(u, v) ≠ d(u, v) + c(u, v) − 1 . . . . . . . . . 34
    3.4 General Path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
    3.5 Square Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
    3.6 General Square Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
    3.7 An Example of a Decomposition of a Graph into a General

           Square Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
    3.8 Another Example of a Decomposition of The Same Graph

           into a General Square Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
    3.9 Transformation A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
    3.10 Transformation B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
    3.11 Transformation C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
    3.12 Reason Why The Shortest Path Between Any Two Vertices

           of Si Must Have Length at Most 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
    5.1 Example Graph with Two Distinct Min Cut-Paths . . . . 61
    5.2 Abstract Representation of the Structure from Figure 5.1 62
    5.3 Abstract Representation of 6 paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
    5.4 Illustration of a Graph with Many Min Cut-Paths . . . . . 62
    5.5 Local cut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64

                                                  74
List of Tables

    This thesis does not contain any tables.

                                                  75
List of Abbreviations

    w.r.t.x – with respect to x
    w.l.o.g. – without loss of generality

                                                  76
A Attachments

    This thesis contains no attachments.

                                                  77
